'name', 'ingredients', 'method'
'Pearl barley, bacon & leek casserole', ["1 tbsp olive oil","2 leeks , thickly sliced","2 garlic cloves , finely chopped","300g pearl barley, soaked for 1 hr","4 carrots , cubed","1 tbsp Dijon mustard , plus extra to serve","1l chicken stock","300g Savoy cabbage , shredded","200g lean  bacon joint, cooked, chopped into small pieces"], ["STEP 1","Heat a large pan over a medium heat. Add the olive oil and cook the leeks for a few mins, then add the garlic and cook for just 1 min more.","STEP 2","Add the pearl barley, carrots and mustard, then pour over the chicken stock. Season with plenty of ground black pepper and simmer for 20 mins, stirring occasionally. Add the cabbage with the bacon, and cook for 5-10 mins until cabbage is wilted and tender. Serve with extra Dijon mustard on the side."]
'Lentil & sweet potato curry', ["2 tbsp vegetable or olive oil","1 red onion, chopped","1 tsp cumin seeds","1 tsp mustard seeds (any colour)","1 tbsp medium curry powder","100g red or green lentil, or a mixture","2 medium  sweet potatoes, peeled and cut into chunks","500ml vegetable stock","400g can chopped tomato","400g can chickpea, drained","¼ small pack coriander (optional)","natural yogurt and naan bread, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat 2 tbsp vegetable or olive\xa0oil in a large pan, add 1 chopped red\xa0onion and cook for a few mins until softened.","STEP 2","Add 1 tsp cumin seeds, 1 tsp mustard seeds and 1 tbsp medium curry powder\xa0and cook for 1 min more, then stir in 100g red or green\xa0lentils (or a mixture), 2 medium sweet potatoes, cut into chunks, 500ml vegetable stock and a 400g can chopped tomatoes.","STEP 3","Bring to the boil, then cover and simmer for 20 mins until the lentils and sweet potatoes are tender. Add a drained 400g can\xa0chickpeas, then heat through.","STEP 4","Season, sprinkle with ¼\xa0small pack coriander, if you like, and serve with seasoned yogurt and naan bread."]
'Sichuan-style pork & green bean stir-fry', ["100g basmati rice","200g green bean , topped and tailed, then halved","1 ½ tbsp sunflower oil","140g pork mince","4 tsp dark soy sauce","2 tsp rice wine","1 tsp caster sugar","¼ tsp Sichuan pepper , lightly crushed using a pestle and mortar","1 red chilli , halved and sliced","4 fat garlic cloves , finely chopped","1 small knob of  ginger , finely chopped","3 spring onions , 2 finely chopped, 1 sliced for garnish","2 tsp sesame oil"], ["STEP 1","Cook the rice following pack instructions. Boil the beans for 4 mins, then drain under cold water, pat dry and set aside.","STEP 2","In a large non-stick wok or frying pan, heat 1 tbsp of the oil. Add the pork mince and fry for a few mins, breaking up into small pieces with the back of a spoon. Stir in half the soy, the rice wine and sugar and cook for 30 secs more. When the meat is cooked through, tip onto a plate.","STEP 3","Heat the remaining oil in the pan. Add the pepper, chilli, garlic, ginger and chopped onions, and stir-fry for 2 mins until ginger and garlic are softened. Tip in the beans, heat through, then add the mince – stir-fry for 2 mins until hot. Stir in the rest of the soy and sesame oil. Scatter with spring onions and serve with rice."]
'Healthy chilli', ["1-2 tbsp olive oil, plus extra if needed","400g diced stewing beef","1 onion, finely chopped","2 garlic cloves, finely chopped","1 ½ tsp ground cumin","1-2 tbsp chipotle paste (or gluten-free alternative), depending on how spicy you like it","400g can kidney bean in chilli sauce","400g can chopped tomato","1 lime, zested and cut into wedges","¼ small pack coriander, leaves only","cooked rice, to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a large pan and cook the beef pieces for a few mins on each side until browned all over. Remove from the pan with a slotted spoon and set aside.","STEP 2","Add the onion to the pan, with extra oil if needed, and cook until softened. Stir in the garlic, cumin and chipotle paste, and cook for 1 min. Sieve the kidney beans, reserving the sauce. Add this sauce, along with the chopped tomatoes and a can full of water, to the pan. Stir well, then return the meat to the pan. Bring to a simmer, then cook, covered, for 2 hrs or until the beef is tender (or bake in the oven for 3 hrs at 160C/140C fan/gas 3).","STEP 3","Add the reserved kidney beans and lime zest, season and warm through. Serve with a scattering of coriander leaves, the lime wedges to squeeze over, and rice, if you like."]
'Tomato & rice soup', ["2 tsp olive oil","1 onion , finely chopped","1 carrot , finely chopped","1 celery stick, finely chopped","1 tbsp golden caster sugar","2 tbsp vinegar (white, red or balsamic)","1 tbsp tomato purée","400g can  chopped tomato or passata","1l vegetable stock made with 2 cubes","140g rice (long-grain, basmati, wild, brown or a mixture)","¼ small pack  parsley , leaves only, chopped, and a few drops of pesto, to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a large saucepan and add the onion, carrot and celery, then cook gently until softened. Add the sugar and vinegar, cook for 1 min, then stir through the tomato purée. Add the chopped tomatoes or passata, the vegetable stock, and any brown rice, if using, then cover and simmer for 10 mins. If you are using wild rice, add this and simmer for 10 mins more. Finally, add any white rice you’re using, and simmer for a final 10 mins until the rice is tender.","STEP 2","Just before serving, sprinkle over some chopped parsley and season to taste. Divide into bowls and add a swirl of pesto to each, if you like."]
'Egg-fried cauliflower rice with prawn cracker crumbs', ["160g frozen green beans","160g frozen peas","1 tbsp sunflower oil","50g bacon lardons","1 onion , chopped","160g carrots , peeled and finely chopped","1 large egg , beaten","200g small cauliflower florets","1 tbsp soy sauce","25ml sweet chilli sauce","20g prawn cracker"], ["STEP 1","Put the kettle on to boil. Put the beans and peas in a large sieve then pour over the boiled water to defrost them. Drain and set aside.","STEP 2","Heat 1 tsp oil in a large, non-stick frying pan or wok. Add the bacon and fry for 2-3 mins. Add another 1 tsp oil and cook the onion and carrots for 1-2 mins until slightly softened, then push the veg and bacon to one side of the pan. Add the final 1 tsp oil, then pour in the egg, stirring constantly to scramble it.","STEP 3","Pulse the cauliflower in a food processor until it resembles rice. Add the cauliflower and soy to the pan, and stir together. Add the green beans and peas, and cook, stirring, for 1-2 mins until hot through. Divide between two plates and serve with sweet chilli sauce for drizzling. Break the prawn crackers into rough crumbs. The crackers absorb moisture quickly so, to keep them crunchy, it’s best to serve them in a dish on the side to sprinkle over the rice while eating."]
'Smoky sweet potato & bean cakes with citrus salad', ["1 sweet potato (about 200g), cut into cubes","400g can red kidney beans , drained and rinsed","3 spring onions , finely sliced","small bunch of  coriander , chopped","1 tbsp chipotle paste","2 tbsp sunflower oil","2 tbsp mayonnaise","juice 1 lime","1 Little Gem lettuce , torn","½ cucumber , halved lengthways and sliced on the diagonal","1 carrot , halved lengthways and sliced on the diagonal"], ["STEP 1","Microwave the sweet potato on High for 6 mins until tender. Lightly mash the beans, then add the potatoes, 2 spring onions, coriander, chipotle paste and seasoning. Mash a little more until the potato is combined. Shape into 4 cakes.","STEP 2","Heat the oil in a non-stick frying pan, then fry the bean cakes for 4-5 mins each side.","STEP 3","Meanwhile, mix the mayo, lime juice and seasoning in a bowl. Add remaining onion and salad ingredients and toss well. Serve alongside the bean cakes."]
'Fruity tabbouleh with feta', ["100g bulgur wheat","6 tbsp olive oil","100g couscous","200g mixed shelled nut , roughly chopped (any mixture of almonds, hazelnuts, walnuts, pecans and pistachios)","200g mixed  dried fruit , large fruit chopped (any mixture of raisins, sultanas, apricots, dates and cranberries)","zest and juice 2  lemons","small pack  mint , leaves roughly chopped","small pack  flat-leaf parsley , leaves roughly chopped","2 garlic cloves , crushed","100g feta cheese , crumbled","grilled lamb or  pork chops , to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Boil the kettle. Put the bulgur wheat in a sieve and rinse with cold water until the water runs clear. Drain well and transfer to a mixing bowl. Pour over 200ml boiling water and 1 tbsp olive oil, cover with a plate and leave to soak for 30 mins. Meanwhile, put the couscous into a second mixing bowl with 1 tbsp olive oil, just cover with boiling water, then cover with a plate and leave to stand for 5-10 mins.","STEP 2","Once the bulgur wheat and couscous are ready, put them in a mixing bowl and fluff up the grains with a fork. Stir through the nuts and dried fruit, too.","STEP 3","Whisk together the lemon zest and juice, herbs, remaining olive oil and the garlic. Pour over the grains, nuts and fruit, and stir everything together well with some seasoning. Transfer to a serving plate, scatter with the crumbled feta, and serve with grilled lamb or pork chops, if you like."]
'Roasted beetroot & egg salad', ["200g vacuum-packed cooked beetroot (not in vinegar), cut into wedges","2 tbsp olive oil","3 tsp sherry vinegar","1 tbsp clear honey","2 eggs","2 tbsp crème fraîche","1 tsp Dijon mustard","a few stalks of  dill , most finely chopped, a few small fronds picked for garnish","70g bag lamb\'s lettuce","1 tbsp roasted chopped hazelnut","2 slices  bread and butter, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Pop the beetroot in a roasting tin, add half the oil, 2 tsp of the vinegar, the honey and seasoning. Roast for 20-25 mins, tossing twice until sticky. Leave to cool for a few mins.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, put the eggs in boiling water. Turn down the heat and simmer for 10 mins, then run under cold water to cool. Peel and halve.","STEP 3","Mix the remaining oil, crème fraîche, mustard, the final tsp of vinegar and chopped dill together. Toss the lamb’s lettuce in the dressing, and arrange on plates with the roasted beetroot and egg. Scatter with a few more dill fronds and tumble over the nuts. Serve with bread and butter."]
'Apple crumble sundae', ["2 tbsp butter","4 Granny Smiths apples, cored and diced","1 tsp ground cinnamon","2 tbsp light brown sugar","8 scoops vanilla ice cream","2 ginger nuts biscuits, crushed"], ["STEP 1","In a small saucepan, melt the butter over a gentle heat and add the apples, cinnamon and sugar. Cook for 10 mins or until the apples have softened but still hold their shape.","STEP 2","Split the mixture between four sundae glasses or bowls. Sit 2 scoops of ice cream on top of each, followed by the crushed biscuits. Serve while the apple mix is still warm."]
'Bhaji frittata', ["2 tbsp vegetable oil","2 onions , thinly sliced","1 garlic clove , finely chopped","2 tsp mild  curry powder","450g potato , coarsely grated and any excess liquid squeezed out","6 medium eggs , beaten","100g frozen pea","small pack  coriander , roughly chopped","mango chutney, natural yogurt and naan bread , to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Heat the oil in an ovenproof frying pan and fry the onion for about 10 mins over a medium heat until golden. Add the garlic and curry powder and cook for 1-2 mins.","STEP 2","Next, add the grated potatoes and cook for 5-8 mins, stirring occasionally. You want the potatoes to soften, but also catch a little and turn golden in patches. Season the eggs, then pour into the pan with the peas and most of the coriander, swirling to coat the potato mixture. Cook for 1 min more, then transfer to the oven for 10 mins until the eggs have set. Sprinkle with the remaining coriander and serve with mango chutney, natural yogurt and naan bread, if you like."]
'Udon noodle soup', ["1 vegetable stock cube","50ml teriyaki sauce","1 tbsp vegetable oil","140g chestnut mushroom , sliced","½ bunch spring onions , thinly sliced","140g udon noodle","200g bag spinach"], ["STEP 1","In a large pan, dissolve the stock cube in 1 litre of water and stir in the teriyaki sauce. While the soup base comes to the boil, heat the oil in a frying pan and cook the mushrooms over a high heat, for 2-3 mins, until they turn golden. Add the spring onions and cook for 1 min more, then set aside.","STEP 2","Once the soup base has come to the boil, add the noodles and cook for 4 mins. Add the spinach and cook for 1 min more until just wilted. Stir in the mushrooms, spring onions and some seasoning, and serve."]
'Swede gnocchi with crispy sage', ["400g floury potatoes , such as King Edwards","600g swede , peeled","4 tbsp olive oil","1 tsp chilli flakes","100g \'00\' flour , plus extra for dusting","30g parmesan (or vegetarian alternative), grated, plus extra to serve","100g butter","small pack sage  leaves picked"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 220C/200C fan/gas 7. Cut the potato and swede into equal- sized chunks, drizzle with 2 tbsp of the oil, season and roast for 50 mins or until completely soft. Leave to cool slightly, then pulse in a food processor until broken down. Add the chilli flakes, flour, Parmesan and some seasoning, then pulse again to form a sticky dough.","STEP 2","Bring a large pan of salted water to the boil in which to cook your gnocchi later. Flour your hands and divide the dough in three. On a floured surface, roll each portion into a sausage about 1cm in diameter. Using the back of a table knife, cut into pieces 2.5cm in length – this gives a tapered edge to the pieces of gnocchi.","STEP 3","Working in batches, cook the gnocchi in the water for 30 secs or until they rise to the surface. Remove with a slotted spoon and drain on a tray lined with kitchen paper. Can be made to this stage up to 4 hrs ahead and kept in the fridge.","STEP 4","Turn the oven to its lowest setting and heat the remaining oil in a large frying pan over a medium heat. Fry the gnocchi in batches for 2 mins on each side until browned, then keep warm in the oven.","STEP 5","Melt the butter in the pan, add the sage leaves and fry until crisp. Divide the gnocchi between bowls then spoon over the crisped sage and buttery sauce. Serve with pepper and grated Parmesan."]
'Scandi meatballs', ["1 tbsp vegetable oil","12 beef meatballs","1 onion , finely chopped","1 garlic clove , finely chopped","294g can condensed mushroom soup","½ x small pack dill , roughly chopped","2 tsp mustard - French, wholegrain, or whatever you have in your cupboard","mashed potato and cooked cabbage , to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a large lidded pan. Cook the meatballs for 3-4 mins over a medium heat, turning often so that they brown all over. Remove from the pan with a slotted spoon and drain away any excess oil, reserving about 1 tbsp.","STEP 2","Add the onion and garlic to the pan and cook for 4-5 mins, stirring to soften. Stir in the soup with half a can of water. Return the meatballs to the pan and bring to the boil. Turn down the heat, cover and simmer for a further 10-15 mins until the meatballs are cooked through. Stir in the dill, mustard and some seasoning. Serve with mashed potato and cabbage."]
'One-pot chicken & mushroom risotto', ["60g butter","1 large onion, finely chopped","2 thyme sprigs, leaves picked","250g pack chestnut mushrooms, sliced","300g risotto rice","1½l hot chicken stock","200g cooked chicken, chopped into chunks","50g grated parmesan, plus extra to serve (optional)","small pack parsley, finely chopped"], ["STEP 1","Heat the butter in a large pan over a gentle heat and add the onion. Cook for 10 mins until softened, then stir in the thyme leaves and mushrooms. Cook for 5 mins, sprinkle in the rice and stir to coat in the mixture.","STEP 2","Ladle in a quarter of the stock and continue cooking, stirring occasionally and topping up with more stock as it absorbs (you may not need all the stock).","STEP 3","When most of the stock has been absorbed and the rice is nearly cooked, add the chicken and stir to warm through. Season well and stir in the parmesan and parsley. Serve scattered with extra parmesan, if you like."]
'Jacket potato with whipped feta & sumac', ["1 baking potato","2 tsp olive oil","½ tsp garlic salt","50g feta","50g Greek yogurt","1 roasted red peppers from a jar (about 25g), finely chopped","½ tsp sumac","few basil leaves , to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 220C/200C fan/ gas 6. Prick the potato all over with a fork and bake for 1 hr until it is golden outside and soft inside. Mix 1 tsp olive oil with the garlic salt. Cut a deep cross into the top of the jacket, drizzle the garlic oil into the cross and rub it all over the outside. Return to the oven and bake for 15 mins more until the edges are golden and crispy.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, crumble the feta into a bowl, add the yogurt and whisk together until creamy. Stir in the red pepper with a good grind of black pepper and spoon the whipped feta into the jacket. Sprinkle with the sumac, drizzle over the remaining 1 tsp olive oil and scatter a few torn basil leaves on top, if you like."]
'Macaroni cheese with bacon & pine nuts', ["50g pine nuts","4 slices pancetta or bacon, chopped","400g macaroni or other short pasta","300ml pot double cream","200ml pot crème fraîche","200g gruyère or mature cheddar, grated","2 tsp Dijon mustard","green salad , to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Put the pine nuts in a dry frying pan, gently toast for 2-3 mins, then tip onto a plate. In the same pan, add the pancetta or bacon and cook for a few mins until crisp.","STEP 2","Bring a large pan of salted water to the boil and cook the pasta following pack instructions until al dente. Drain, reserving a ladleful of the pasta cooking water for later.","STEP 3","Meanwhile, put the double cream, crème fraîche and half the cheese in a saucepan, stir together and gently warm through until the cheese has melted. Take off the heat, stir in the mustard and some seasoning to taste.","STEP 4","Tip the drained pasta into a large baking dish and stir in the cheese sauce, adding some of the pasta cooking water if it looks a little dry. Sprinkle the toasted pine nuts and cooked pancetta over the top, then scatter over the remaining cheese. Bake for 20 mins until the top is golden and bubbling, then serve with a salad, if you like."]
'Courgette, sausage & rigatoni bakes', ["1 tbsp olive oil","4 good-quality  pork sausages","2 courgettes , sliced on the diagonal then chopped into batons","3 garlic cloves , finely sliced","pinch of  chilli flakes","400g can  chopped tomato","200g rigatoni","½ x 150g ball mozzarella , patted dry and torn into chunks"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a large frying pan. Squeeze the sausagemeat out of the skins, breaking it into little chunks, and pop in the pan. Fry for 8 mins until golden and cooked through. Tip in the courgettes, garlic and a pinch of chilli flakes. Fry for a few mins until just tender. Pour over the chopped tomatoes, season and bubble down for 5 mins or so, adding a splash of water if it’s looking too thick.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, cook the pasta following pack instructions. Drain and stir through the sauce and spoon everything into 2 small flameproof dishes.","STEP 3","Heat the grill to high. Dot the cheese on top of the sausage dishes, then place under the grill until the cheese is golden and bubbling (about 5-10 mins), and serve."]
'Pilchard puttanesca', ["300g spaghetti","1 tbsp olive oil","1 onion , finely chopped","2 garlic cloves , crushed","1 red chilli , deseeded and finely chopped","1 tbsp tomato purée","425g can  pilchard in tomato sauce","70g pack dried  black olive with herbs (we used Crespo), roughly chopped","shaved parmesan , to serve"], ["STEP 1","Cook the pasta following pack instructions. Heat the oil in a non-stick frying pan and cook the onion, garlic and chilli for 3-4 mins to soften. Stir in the tomato purée and cook for 1 min, then add the pilchards with their sauce. Cook, breaking up the fish with a wooden spoon, then add the olives and continue to cook for a few more mins.","STEP 2","Drain the pasta and add to the pan with 2-3 tbsp of the cooking water. Toss everything together well, then divide between plates and serve, scattered with Parmesan."]
'Chorizo & rosemary pearl barley risotto', ["225 chorizo ring, sliced","1 onion, finely chopped","1 garlic clove, finely chopped","300g pearl barley","400g can chopped tomato with sliced olives","1l hot chicken stock, made with 1 stock cube","2 stalks rosemary, leaves chopped"], ["STEP 1","Heat a non-stick frying pan over a medium heat and fry the chorizo for 3-4 mins until it turns golden and releases its oil. Remove with a slotted spoon and set aside.","STEP 2","Add the onion and garlic to the pan, and cook for 3-4 mins, until they begin to soften. Add the pearl barley and stir well to coat in the oil, before tipping in the chopped tomatoes and the chicken stock. Bring just to the boil, then turn down to a simmer and cook for 30 mins, stirring occasionally, until all the liquid has been absorbed and the pearl barley is tender. You may need to top up with a little extra water as you go.","STEP 3","Season and stir in the rosemary and chorizo to serve."]
'Super smoky bacon & tomato spaghetti', ["400g spaghetti","1 tbsp olive oil","120g smoked streaky bacon, sliced into matchsticks","1 onion, finely chopped","1 garlic clove, finely chopped","2 tsp sweet smoked paprika","2 x 400g cans chopped tomatoes","grated parmesan, to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Bring a large pan of water to the boil and cook the spaghetti following pack instructions. Meanwhile, heat the oil in a large non-stick frying pan and cook the bacon for 3-4 mins until just starting to crisp. Stir in the onion and cook for another 3-4 mins, then add the garlic and smoked paprika, and cook for 1 min more.","STEP 2","Pour in the chopped tomatoes, bring to the boil and bubble for about 5 mins until thickened, stirring every so often to stop it catching on the bottom. Drain the pasta and toss with the sauce. Serve with Parmesan, if you like."]
'Creamy tarragon chicken & potato bake', ["60g unsalted butter","6 skinless boneless chicken thighs, cut into bite-sized pieces","80g smoked pancetta, cut into small pieces","2 large onions, sliced","40g plain flour","500ml chicken stock","3 tbsp finely chopped tarragon","2-3 tbsp wholegrain mustard","4 tbsp double cream","2 x 450g packs fresh prepared mashed potato","drizzle of olive oil"], ["STEP 1","Melt 20g of the butter in a flameproof casserole dish over a medium heat. Season the chicken and add to the dish with the pancetta. Fry for 5 mins until the pancetta is crispy and the chicken browned and cooked through. Set aside in a bowl.","STEP 2","Lower the heat, add the remaining butter and, when it starts foaming, add the onions. Cook for 10 mins until softened, then stir through the flour and cook for another 2 mins. Remove from the heat and slowly whisk in the chicken stock. Return to the hob, bring to the boil and cook for 5 mins. Stir through the tarragon, mustard and cream, followed by the chicken and pancetta, and cook for another 5 mins until the sauce is thickened.","STEP 3","Heat the grill to high. Heat the mashed potato following pack instructions, then spoon on top of the chicken filling in the casserole dish. Smooth and swirl the potato over right to the edges, drizzle with a little olive oil and put under the grill for 8-10 mins or until the top is golden and bubbling."]
'Spicy jerk potato & pineapple hash', ["700g Maris Piper potatoes , cut into medium chunks","1 tbsp vegetable oil","4 rashers streaky bacon , cut into bite-sized pieces","40g unsalted butter","½ tbsp jerk seasoning","200g prepared pineapple chunks","4 large eggs","½ small pack coriander , torn","½ red chilli , thinly sliced"], ["STEP 1","Bring a large pan of lightly salted water to the boil. Add the potatoes and boil for 7 mins, then drain and leave to steam-dry for 5 mins. Meanwhile, heat the oil in a large frying pan over a medium heat and fry the bacon for 5 mins until crispy.","STEP 2","Add the butter to the pan along with the potatoes and seasoning, and fry over a medium heat, turning occasionally, for 12 mins. Nestle the pineapple chunks in the pan and cook for a further 3 mins.","STEP 3","Crack the eggs over the potatoes, cover the pan with a lid or large plate and cook for 5-6 mins over a medium-low heat until the whites are just set and the yolks are still runny. Finish with the coriander and a sprinkle of chilli."]
'Roasted aubergine & tomato curry', ["600g baby aubergines, sliced into rounds","3 tbsp olive oil","2 onions, finely sliced","2 garlic cloves, crushed","1 tsp garam masala","1 tsp turmeric","1 tsp ground coriander","400ml can chopped tomatoes","400ml can coconut milk","pinch of  sugar (optional)","½ small pack coriander, roughly chopped","rice or chapatis, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Toss the aubergines in a roasting tin with 2 tbsp olive oil, season well and spread out. Roast for 20 mins or until dark golden and soft.","STEP 2","Heat the remaining oil in an ovenproof pan or flameproof casserole dish and cook the onions over a medium heat for 5-6 mins until softening. Stir in the garlic and spices, for a few mins until the spices release their aromas.","STEP 3","Tip in the tomatoes, coconut milk and roasted aubergines, and bring to a gentle simmer. Simmer for 20-25 mins, removing the lid for the final 5 mins to thicken the sauce. Add a little seasoning if you like, and a pinch of sugar if it needs it. Stir through most of the coriander. Serve over rice or with chapatis, scattering with the remaining coriander."]
'Spicy oven-baked chicken & chips', ["1 tbsp Cajun seasoning","2 tbsp vegetable oil","zest and juice 1  lime","750g large  potato , cut into chips","1kg chicken wing","green salad or coleslaw and  ketchup , to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. In a bowl, whisk together the Cajun seasoning, vegetable oil, lime zest and juice. Toss the chips, wings and Cajun mixture together in batches, so that everything is well coated.","STEP 2","Cover a large baking sheet with foil, then arrange the chips around the outside and the wings in the middle. Season and bake for 20 mins, then turn the chips and return to the oven for a further 20-25 mins until the chips and wings are golden. Serve with green salad, or coleslaw and ketchup."]
'Haddock with cannellini beans & artichokes', ["400g can cannellini beans , drained and rinsed","1 small lemon , zested and juiced","small garlic clove , grated","1 tbsp roughly chopped parsley","2 tbsp olive oil","1 skinless haddock fillet","2 artichokes from a can, drained and halved"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. In a bowl, mix the beans, zest and juice of half the lemon, the garlic and parsley. Stir through 1 tbsp olive oil and season to taste. Very lightly crush the beans with the back of a wooden spoon, keeping some of them whole.","STEP 2","Cut a large square of baking parchment, spoon the beans onto the centre and top with the fish. Scatter the artichokes around the fish, drizzle over the remaining olive oil, squeeze a little lemon juice over and season well. Bring both sides of the parchment upwards and fold together to create a tight seal, then twist the ends tightly (like a giant sweet).","STEP 3","Put the fish on a baking tray and bake in the oven for 13-15 mins or until the fish is just cooked."]
'Raspberry cordial', ["500g raspberry","500g caster sugar","3 tbsp red wine vinegar"], ["STEP 1","Put the raspberries in a pan with the sugar and vinegar. Mash over a low heat for 10 mins until smooth and syrupy. Rub through a sieve into a clean pan.","STEP 2","Tip the seeds from the sieve into a bowl and stir in 300ml water, then sieve again to remove the last of the pulp from seeds. Pour the liquid into the pan with the sieved pulp, stir well and boil for 1 min. Pour into small sterilised bottles and seal. The cordial will keep unopened for a few months. Once opened, store in the fridge."]
'Herbed Jersey Royal crab cakes', ["400g Jersey Royal potatoes , scrubbed not peeled","2 tbsp olive oil","pinch of fennel seeds","¼ bulb of fennel , finely chopped","1 red chilli , deseeded and finely chopped","1 garlic clove , crushed","4 spring onions , sliced","handful of samphire (optional)","200g cooked crabmeat , a mix of white and brown","finely chopped soft herbs (a mixture of dill, parsley and tarragon works well), plus extra to serve","1 tbsp capers","pinch of cayenne pepper","1 lemon , 1/2 zested and juiced, 1/2 cut into wedges for serving","1 tbsp mayonnaise , plus extra to serve","flour ,  for dusting","watercress , to serve"], ["STEP 1","Put the potatoes in a pan, cover with water, add 1 tsp salt and bring to the boil. Cook for 12-15 mins or until tender enough to smash. Leave to cool.","STEP 2","Heat 1 tbsp of the oil in a frying pan and add the fennel seeds, fennel, chilli and garlic followed by the spring onions. Gently cook for 3-5 mins until fragrant but not coloured. During the last minute, add the samphire.","STEP 3","In a bowl, mash the potatoes until well broken down, then combine with the crabmeat, herbs, spring onion mix, cayenne, lemon zest and mayo. Season and mix until well combined, then chill for 30 mins.","STEP 4","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Oil your hands and shape the mixture into eight palm-sized patties and dip in plenty of flour. Be careful, as they are quite fragile and sticky – a good way to do this is on a tray lined with baking parchment. If you have time, put in the fridge to set for 30 mins before cooking. Heat the remaining oil in a non-stick frying pan and fry for 2-3 mins on each side until crisp and golden. Transfer to an oiled baking tray and finish in the oven for 5 mins. Serve with mayo, some watercress tossed with the remaining herbs, and the lemon juice with the lemon wedges on the side."]
'Pineapple & pork skewers', ["400g pork fillet","4 tbsp light muscovado sugar","60ml cider vinegar","1 tsp fish sauce","½ small pineapple , peeled, cored and cut into chunks (or use ready prepped fresh pineapple, drained well)","1 green pepper , deseeded and cut into squares (optional)","4 spring onions , trimmed and cut into 4 equal lengths","small bunch coriander , chopped (optional)","cooked rice or pitta, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Cut the pork into cubes. Heat the sugar and vinegar in a pan over a low heat until the sugar melts. Add the fish sauce and cool. Tip in the pork and mix well so that all the cubes are covered in sauce.","STEP 2","Heat the barbecue. If you are using coals, wait until they turn white. If you are indoors, heat a griddle pan. Thread the pork and pineapple onto skewers, alternating pieces with the pepper and spring onion.","STEP 3","Barbecue or griddle the skewers for 3-4 mins each side (you may need to cook them for longer if griddling). Sprinkle with coriander, if you like, then serve with rice or slide into pitta breads."]
'Herbed Jersey Royal crab cakes', ["400g Jersey Royal potatoes , scrubbed not peeled","2 tbsp olive oil","pinch of fennel seeds","¼ bulb of fennel , finely chopped","1 red chilli , deseeded and finely chopped","1 garlic clove , crushed","4 spring onions , sliced","handful of samphire (optional)","200g cooked crabmeat , a mix of white and brown","finely chopped soft herbs (a mixture of dill, parsley and tarragon works well), plus extra to serve","1 tbsp capers","pinch of cayenne pepper","1 lemon , 1/2 zested and juiced, 1/2 cut into wedges for serving","1 tbsp mayonnaise , plus extra to serve","flour ,  for dusting","watercress , to serve"], ["STEP 1","Put the potatoes in a pan, cover with water, add 1 tsp salt and bring to the boil. Cook for 12-15 mins or until tender enough to smash. Leave to cool.","STEP 2","Heat 1 tbsp of the oil in a frying pan and add the fennel seeds, fennel, chilli and garlic followed by the spring onions. Gently cook for 3-5 mins until fragrant but not coloured. During the last minute, add the samphire.","STEP 3","In a bowl, mash the potatoes until well broken down, then combine with the crabmeat, herbs, spring onion mix, cayenne, lemon zest and mayo. Season and mix until well combined, then chill for 30 mins.","STEP 4","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Oil your hands and shape the mixture into eight palm-sized patties and dip in plenty of flour. Be careful, as they are quite fragile and sticky – a good way to do this is on a tray lined with baking parchment. If you have time, put in the fridge to set for 30 mins before cooking. Heat the remaining oil in a non-stick frying pan and fry for 2-3 mins on each side until crisp and golden. Transfer to an oiled baking tray and finish in the oven for 5 mins. Serve with mayo, some watercress tossed with the remaining herbs, and the lemon juice with the lemon wedges on the side."]
'Pineapple & pork skewers', ["400g pork fillet","4 tbsp light muscovado sugar","60ml cider vinegar","1 tsp fish sauce","½ small pineapple , peeled, cored and cut into chunks (or use ready prepped fresh pineapple, drained well)","1 green pepper , deseeded and cut into squares (optional)","4 spring onions , trimmed and cut into 4 equal lengths","small bunch coriander , chopped (optional)","cooked rice or pitta, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Cut the pork into cubes. Heat the sugar and vinegar in a pan over a low heat until the sugar melts. Add the fish sauce and cool. Tip in the pork and mix well so that all the cubes are covered in sauce.","STEP 2","Heat the barbecue. If you are using coals, wait until they turn white. If you are indoors, heat a griddle pan. Thread the pork and pineapple onto skewers, alternating pieces with the pepper and spring onion.","STEP 3","Barbecue or griddle the skewers for 3-4 mins each side (you may need to cook them for longer if griddling). Sprinkle with coriander, if you like, then serve with rice or slide into pitta breads."]
'Strawberry shortcake slice', ["600ml double cream","1 tbsp vanilla bean paste","1 tbsp orange blossom water","125g icing sugar , plus 2 tbsp","500g shortcake biscuits , plus 3 crushed","350g strawberries , sliced"], ["STEP 1","Line a 20cm cake tin or dish (either a square or rectangle works well) with cling film, leaving\xa0an overhang. Whip 500ml of the cream, the vanilla, orange blossom water and 125g icing sugar with an electric whisk until thick and billowy.","STEP 2","Add a layer of biscuits to the tin, and spoon over some of the cream, about 1cm thick all over. Add a layer of strawberry slices, then repeat with the cream, biscuits and strawberries until you fill the tin, finishing on a layer of biscuit. You’ll have some strawberries left over to serve. Press everything down well so every biscuit is covered in cream. Cover and chill overnight.","STEP 3","To serve, flip the tin onto a serving plate, and remove the cling film. Whip the remaining 100ml cream with 1 tbsp icing sugar and dollop on top of the cake, swirling it around. Top with the remaining strawberry slices in lines, sift over the remaining 1 tbsp icing sugar, and sprinkle the biscuit crumbs in between the rows of strawberries. Cut into slices to serve."]
'Stuffed rainbow baguette', ["1 artisan-style baguette","4 tbsp hummus","8 slices medium  cheddar","¼ red pepper , thinly sliced","¼ cooked beetroot , shredded","2 radishes , thinly sliced","1 yellow or orange carrot , shredded or grated","handful green leaves","1 tbsp vegetarian pesto , mixed with 1 tbsp olive oil"], ["STEP 1","Cut the baguette in half so you can open it out like a book. Spread the hummus over the bottom half of the baguette and add the cheese, breaking the slices up if you need to. Scatter the pepper, beetroot, radish and carrot along the baguette, then add the leaves, dribble with the pesto and close the baguette.","STEP 2","Wrap the baguette tightly in baking parchment and tie securely with string. Take a bread knife with you so you can slice it when you’re ready to eat it."]
'Pepper & lemon spaghetti with basil & pine nuts', ["1 tbsp rapeseed oil","1 red pepper , deseeded and diced","150g wholemeal spaghetti","2 courgettes (250g), grated","2 garlic cloves , finely grated","1 lemon , zested and juiced","15g basil , finely chopped","25g pine nuts , toasted","2 tbsp finely grated parmesan or vegetarian alternative (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a large non-stick frying pan. Add the pepper and cook for 5 mins. Meanwhile, cook the pasta for 10-12 mins until tender.","STEP 2","Add the courgette and garlic to the pepper and cook, stirring very frequently, for 10-15 mins until the courgette is really soft.","STEP 3","Stir in the lemon zest and juice, basil and spaghetti (reserve some pasta water) and toss together, adding a little of the pasta water until nicely coated. Add the pine nuts, then spoon into bowls and serve topped with the parmesan, if using."]
'Lemon & yogurt chicken flatbreads', ["2 skinless chicken breasts , cut into strips","1 lemon","1 tsp dried oregano (optional)","1 garlic clove , crushed","pinch of cinnamon","1 tbsp olive oil","4 flatbreads","4 tbsp Greek yogurt","¼ red pepper , finely chopped","1 Little Gem lettuce , finely chopped"], ["STEP 1","Put the chicken in a bowl. Pare strips of zest from the lemon using a vegetable peeler, then juice the lemon too. Add the peel and half the juice to the chicken, along with the oregano (if using), garlic, cinnamon and oil. Mix well, cover and chill for an hour. The lemon juice will start to ‘cook’ the chicken, so don’t leave for longer.","STEP 2","Heat the barbecue. If you are using coals, wait until they turn white. If you are indoors, heat a griddle pan. Thread the chicken strips onto a couple of metal skewers to stop them falling through the grate (you don’t need to do this for the griddle), then grill for a couple of mins each side. The strips will cook through quickly so don’t leave them too long. Season if you like.","STEP 3","Warm the flatbreads on the edge of the barbecue (or on the griddle) for a minute, then transfer them to plates and spread each with ½ tbsp yogurt. Divide the chicken strips between them, then dot on the remaining yogurt and sprinkle over the pepper and lettuce. Fold or roll the flatbreads to eat."]
'Spiced hummingbird cake', ["225ml vegetable oil , plus extra for the tins","300g self-raising flour","½ tsp baking powder","300g golden caster sugar","1 tsp ground cinnamon","2 cardamom pods , cracked open and seeds finely crushed","whole nutmeg , for grating","2 very ripe bananas , mashed","3 medium eggs , beaten","150g pineapple chunks , from a can, drained and chopped","80g pecans , finely chopped","200g full-fat soft cheese","150g softened, unsalted butter","80g runny honey","80g icing sugar","1 large orange , zested","edible flowers and dried pineapple rings, to decorate (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Oil two 20cm, loose-bottomed cake tins and line the bottom of each one with baking parchment.","STEP 2","Sieve the flour into a large mixing bowl, and add 1/2 tsp salt and the baking powder. Stir through the sugar, cinnamon, cardamom and a very good grating of nutmeg. In a separate bowl, whisk the mashed bananas through the eggs and oil until well combined. Make a well in the centre of the dry ingredients and tip in the wet mixture. Fold everything together until combined, then mix through the pineapple and pecans. Spoon the mixture into the tins and bake in the centre of the oven for 35-45 mins or until a skewer inserted into the middle comes out clean. Leave to cool in the tins for about 10 mins before transferring to a wire rack to cool down completely.","STEP 3","Meanwhile, put the soft cheese, softened butter, honey and sugar into a mixing bowl and beat together until just combined. Try not to overbeat the mixture or it will become too soft and runny. Chill for 30 mins in the fridge before using.","STEP 4","Put one of the cakes on a serving plate and spread with half the icing. Top with the other cake and smooth over the remaining icing. Finish with shavings of orange zest, edible flowers and dried pineapple rings, if you like. Will keep in an airtight container for up to three days."]
'Summer egg salad with basil & peas', ["150g new potatoes , thickly sliced","160g French beans , trimmed","160g frozen peas","3 eggs","160g romaine lettuce , roughly torn into pieces","1 tbsp extra virgin olive oil","2 tsp cider vinegar","½ tsp English mustard powder","2 tbsp chopped mint","3 tbsp chopped basil","1 garlic clove , finely grated","1 tbsp capers"], ["STEP 1","Cook the potatoes in a pan of simmering water for 5 mins. Add the beans and cook 5 mins more, then tip in the peas and cook for 2 mins until all the vegetables are just tender. Meanwhile, boil the eggs in another pan for 8 mins. Drain and run under cold water, then carefully shell and halve.","STEP 2","Mix all the dressing ingredients together in a large bowl with a good grinding of black pepper, crushing the herbs and capers with the back of a spoon to intensify their flavours.","STEP 3","Mix the warm vegetables into the dressing to coat, then add the lettuce and toss everything together. Pile onto plates, top with the eggs and grind over some black pepper to serve."]
'Gin & tonic cheesecake', ["250g digestive biscuits","100g butter , melted","600g cream cheese","100g icing sugar","zest and juice of 1 lime , plus extra zest to serve","50ml gin","280ml double cream","250ml can gin and tonic","2 tbsp caster sugar","1 lemon , half juiced, half finely sliced","2 medium meringues , crushed"], ["STEP 1","Butter and line a 23cm loose-bottomed tin with baking parchment. Put the digestive biscuits in a plastic food bag and crush to crumbs using a rolling pin, or blitz in a food processor. Transfer to a bowl, then pour over the melted butter. Mix thoroughly until the crumbs are completely coated. Tip them into the prepared tin and press firmly down into the base to create an even layer. Chill in the fridge for 1 hr to set firmly.","STEP 2","To make the filling, place the cream cheese, icing sugar and lime zest in a bowl, then beat with an electric whisk until smooth. Tip in the gin and double cream, and continue beating until the mixture is thick and completely combined. Now spoon it onto the biscuit base, and spread to the edges. Smooth the top of the cheesecake down with the back of a dessert spoon or spatula. Leave to set in the fridge overnight.","STEP 3","Pour the can of gin and tonic into a pan, add the caster sugar and lemon juice and boil hard. Once it has reduced to a syrup (about 3-4 minutes over high heat), cool a little, then add the lime juice and the slices of lemon and toss in the syrup. Allow to cool completely.","STEP 4","To serve, place the base of the cheesecake on top of a can, then gradually pull the sides of the tin down. Slip the cake onto a serving plate, removing the lining paper and base. Top with a handful of the crushed meringues, then drizzle with the syrup, scattering the lemon slices on top as you go. Add a final dusting of lime zest, slice and serve."]
'Summer fruit & mascarpone tart', ["2 x 320g ready-rolled all-butter puff pastry","100g icing sugar","750g tub mascarpone","600ml double cream","2 tsp vanilla extract","200g raspberries , a few halved","200g blackberries , a few halved","1 large mango , peeled and thinly sliced","6 nectarines or peaches, or a mixture, sliced","4 passion fruits (look for ones with crinkly skin, this means they’re ripe), halved, seeds and pulp scooped out","handful small mint leaves"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Unroll 1 pastry sheet, but leave it on the parchment. Place it on a baking tray, dust with 2 tbsp icing sugar, then cover with another sheet of parchment and another baking tray. Pour baking beans into the tray to weigh it down, or use empty cans. Bake for 30 mins, then check if the pastry is golden all over. If not, return for another 5 mins or so. Repeat with the other pastry sheet (or cook both together if you have enough trays). Once out of the oven, trim the edges with a large, sharp knife. Leave to cool.","STEP 2","Softly whip the mascarpone, cream, vanilla and remaining icing sugar, then transfer half to a disposable piping bag fitted with a 1.5cm round nozzle (or just snip off the corner). Pipe blobs of the mascarpone cream over the surface of one piece of pastry, right up to the edges. Top with half the fruit and dust with a little icing sugar.","STEP 3","Top with the second piece of pastry, more mascarpone cream (refilling the bag when you need to), the remaining fruit, a dusting of icing sugar and, finally, some mint leaves. Use a serrated knife to cut through the layers without squashing the whole tart. Best served within an hour or two, but leftovers will keep for up to two days in the fridge."]
'Sweet potatoes with red pepper & halloumi', ["4 medium sweet potatoes","1 tbsp olive oil","8 mint leaves , finely chopped","225g halloumi , cut into 4 slices","4 fat strips grilled red pepper","butter (optional)","1 lemon , halved","small bunch parsley , chopped"], ["STEP 1","Rub each potato with a little oil and salt, then wrap in a double layer of foil.","STEP 2","Pour the oil into a bowl and stir in the mint. Add the halloumi and toss until well coated in the minty oil. Wrap each piece in a strip of pepper. Cut four lengths of foil about 1cm wide and wrap one around the middle of each parcel to hold them together. You could use skewers instead, but be careful not to split the cheese.","STEP 3","Heat the barbecue. When the coals glow red, put the potatoes directly on them. Cook for 30 mins, turning halfway. Unwrap a potato and check if it is cooked through. If not, rewrap and cook more, checking every 10 mins. Alternatively, bake in the oven at 200C/180C fan/gas 6 for 50 mins-1 hr.","STEP 4","Meanwhile cook the pepper parcels on the barbecue or a griddle pan for 3-4 mins each side or until the pepper chars and the cheese melts a bit. Remove from the grill and unwind the foil or remove the skewers. Split the potatoes, add butter if you like, then lay a parcel in the centre of each. Add a squeeze of lemon and scatter over some parsley to serve."]
'Mozzarella sticks', ["400g block mozzarella (not in water)","50g flour","2 eggs","150g breadcrumbs","2 tsp smoked paprika","2 tsp dried oregano","vegetable or sunflower oil for frying","dips , to serve"], ["STEP 1","Cut the mozzarella into ‘chips’. Tip the flour into a bowl and season well. Whisk the eggs in a second bowl and tip the breadcrumbs, paprika and oregano into a third. Coat the mozzarella sticks in the flour, then the egg, then the breadcrumbs. Transfer to a parchment-lined tray and freeze for at least 2 hrs.","STEP 2","Heat enough oil to come 2-3cm up the side of a saucepan. When hot, drop in a test chip – it should sizzle straight away and brown within a minute or two. The secret is to cook them long enough to crisp up the outside without letting the mozzarella ooze out – it may take you a few practice chips to get it right. Cook the chips in batches and drain on kitchen paper. Serve hot with your favourite dip."]
'Tomato, burrata & broad bean salad', ["500g tomatoes (I used a mix of sizes and colours)","1⁄2 tsp caster sugar","150g broad beans , podded","handful basil","handful chives","handful flat leaf parsley","1 tbsp tarragon","1 tbsp lovage","1 tbsp mint leaves","3 tbsp olive oil","2 tsp Dijon mustard","pinch of fennel seeds","1 lemon , zested","1 tbsp red wine vinegar","2 x 100g burrata or 2 x 125g balls mozzarella","50g hazelnuts , toasted and roughly chopped"], ["STEP 1","Chop the tomatoes into a mixture of slices and wedges, then put them in a bowl. Toss with 1/2 tsp salt and the sugar, then leave to marinate for 30 mins. Meanwhile, bring a pan of water to the boil and add the broad beans. Boil for 2 mins, then drain and allow to cool for a couple of mins. Peel them out of their shells. This is a bit fiddly but well worth it – I use my thumbnail to pierce the skin, then gently squeeze out the shiny green beans.","STEP 2","Finely chop the herbs, then tip into a bowl and whisk in the olive oil, mustard, fennel seeds, most of the lemon zest, and red wine vinegar. Season, then stir in the broad beans.","STEP 3","Tip the tomatoes onto a serving platter. Top with the burrata, then spoon over the broad bean salsa. Scatter over the hazelnuts and remaining lemon zest to serve."]
'Fennel, roast lemon & tomato salad', ["2 lemons","2 tbsp extra virgin olive oil","pinch of sugar","500g mixed tomatoes (I used cherry tomatoes and some larger ones)","3 fennel bulbs","100g pomegranate seeds","1⁄2 small pack tarragon leaves","1⁄2 small pack parsley leaves","1⁄2 small pack mint leaves"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6 and line a baking tray with baking parchment. Slice 1 lemon into thin rounds and spread out on the baking tray, drizzle over 1/2 tbsp oil and sprinkle over the sugar. Roast for 20-25 mins until shrivelled and caramelised in places. Keep an eye on them – you may have to take some out the oven before the others are done. These can be made in the morning and kept at room temperature.","STEP 2","While the lemons are cooking, roughly chop the tomatoes and thinly slice the fennel, saving the fronds. Put in a bowl with the remaining olive oil, juice from the other lemon and pomegranate seeds. Season to taste, then give everything a good mix.","STEP 3","When you’re ready to serve, roughly chop all the herbs and mix them into the salad along with the roasted lemons and fennel fronds."]
'Bean, feta & herb dip', ["400g can cannellini bean","200g feta cheese","1 tbsp lemon juice","1 garlic clove , crushed","3 tbsp chopped dill, mint or  chives (or 1 tbsp each)"], ["STEP 1","Drain and rinse beans. Tip into a food processor with feta, lemon juice and garlic, and whizz until smooth. Add dill, mint or chives, and season with pepper."]
'Gin & tonic cheesecake', ["250g digestive biscuits","100g butter , melted","600g cream cheese","100g icing sugar","zest and juice of 1 lime , plus extra zest to serve","50ml gin","280ml double cream","250ml can gin and tonic","2 tbsp caster sugar","1 lemon , half juiced, half finely sliced","2 medium meringues , crushed"], ["STEP 1","Butter and line a 23cm loose-bottomed tin with baking parchment. Put the digestive biscuits in a plastic food bag and crush to crumbs using a rolling pin, or blitz in a food processor. Transfer to a bowl, then pour over the melted butter. Mix thoroughly until the crumbs are completely coated. Tip them into the prepared tin and press firmly down into the base to create an even layer. Chill in the fridge for 1 hr to set firmly.","STEP 2","To make the filling, place the cream cheese, icing sugar and lime zest in a bowl, then beat with an electric whisk until smooth. Tip in the gin and double cream, and continue beating until the mixture is thick and completely combined. Now spoon it onto the biscuit base, and spread to the edges. Smooth the top of the cheesecake down with the back of a dessert spoon or spatula. Leave to set in the fridge overnight.","STEP 3","Pour the can of gin and tonic into a pan, add the caster sugar and lemon juice and boil hard. Once it has reduced to a syrup (about 3-4 minutes over high heat), cool a little, then add the lime juice and the slices of lemon and toss in the syrup. Allow to cool completely.","STEP 4","To serve, place the base of the cheesecake on top of a can, then gradually pull the sides of the tin down. Slip the cake onto a serving plate, removing the lining paper and base. Top with a handful of the crushed meringues, then drizzle with the syrup, scattering the lemon slices on top as you go. Add a final dusting of lime zest, slice and serve."]
'Korean chilli, sesame & honey chicken', ["12 chicken thighs , boneless and skinless","2 tbsp soy sauce","1 tbsp sesame oil","thumb-sized piece ginger , grated","4 spring onions , sliced","4 tbsp Korean chilli paste (gochujang) or use a mixture of 3 tbsp ketchup and 1 tbsp sriracha chilli sauce","2 tbsp honey","juice ½ lime","1 tbsp soy sauce","1 tsp sesame oil","2 tbsp sesame seeds"], ["STEP 1","Toss the chicken in the soy sauce, sesame oil and ginger. Thread each thigh on two long metal skewers, so that each skewer pierces one side of the thigh. Keep threading the chicken, making sure it’s packed onto the skewers tightly. Chill until you’re ready to cook. Mix the ingredients for the glaze.","STEP 2","Heat the BBQ. If using a coal BBQ, wait for the coals to turn ashen before you start cooking. Cook the kebab for 5-8 mins on each side (depending on the heat). Once nicely charred but not fully cooked through, start painting on the glaze. The honey will catch if cooked for too long – the key to nice sticky chicken is applying the glaze in layers, turning the kebab often.","STEP 3","Once the glaze has been used up and the chicken is cooked through (it’ll take about 20 mins in total), transfer to a plate and leave to cool for 5 mins before serving scattered with spring onions."]
'One-pan nachos with black beans', ["175g yellow or blue tortilla chips","200g fresh tomato salsa","150g medium cheddar , grated","1 red pepper , quartered, cored and finely chopped","400g can black beans , drained","1 avocado , diced","soured cream , to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Arrange the tortilla chips over two-thirds of the tray, spoon most of the salsa on top and scatter over half of the cheese.","STEP 2","Mix the remaining salsa with the red pepper and beans, and tip onto the empty third of the tray. Scatter over the rest of the cheese. Bake for 10-15 mins or until the cheese has melted. Scatter the avocado over the beans and add dollops of the soured cream to serve."]
'Cauliflower steaks with roasted red pepper & olive salsa', ["1 cauliflower","½ tsp smoked paprika","2 tbsp olive oil","1 roasted red pepper","4 black olives, pitted","small handful parsley","1 tsp capers","½ tbsp red wine vinegar","2 tbsp toasted flaked almonds"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 220C/200C fan/gas 7 and line a baking tray with baking parchment. Slice the cauliflower into two 1-inch steaks – use the middle part as it’s larger, and save the rest for another time. Rub the paprika and ½ tbsp oil over the steaks and season. Put on the tray and roast for 15-20 mins until cooked through.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, make the salsa. Chop the pepper, olives, parsley and capers, and put into a bowl and mix with the remaining oil and vinegar. Season to taste. When the steaks are cooked, spoon over the salsa and top with flaked almonds to serve."]
'Sweetcorn fritters with eggs & black bean salsa', ["1 tsp rapeseed oil","1 small red onion (85g), finely chopped","1 red pepper , deseeded and finely diced","100g wholemeal self-raising flour","1 tsp smoked paprika","1 tsp ground coriander","1 tsp baking powder","325g can sweetcorn , drained","6 large eggs","1 small red onion (85g), finely chopped","4 tomatoes (320g), chopped","2 x 400g cans black beans , drained","1 lime , zested and juiced","½ x 30g pack coriander , chopped"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6 and line a large baking tray with baking parchment.","STEP 2","Heat the oil in a small pan and fry the onion and pepper for 5 mins until softened. Meanwhile, mix the flour, spices and baking powder in a bowl. Add the onions, pepper, corn and 2 of the eggs, then mix together well.","STEP 3","Spoon eight mounds of the mixture onto the baking tray, well spaced apart, then flatten slightly with the back of the spoon. Bake for 20 mins until set and golden.","STEP 4","Meanwhile, mix together the salsa ingredients and poach 2 of the remaining eggs to your liking. If you\'re following our Healthy Diet Plan, serve four fritters on the day you make them, topped with half the salsa and the poached eggs. Chill the remaining fritters for another day. Reheat them in a pan or microwave and serve with 2 more poached eggs and the remaining salsa."]
'Strawberry shortcake slice', ["600ml double cream","1 tbsp vanilla bean paste","1 tbsp orange blossom water","125g icing sugar , plus 2 tbsp","500g shortcake biscuits , plus 3 crushed","350g strawberries , sliced"], ["STEP 1","Line a 20cm cake tin or dish (either a square or rectangle works well) with cling film, leaving\xa0an overhang. Whip 500ml of the cream, the vanilla, orange blossom water and 125g icing sugar with an electric whisk until thick and billowy.","STEP 2","Add a layer of biscuits to the tin, and spoon over some of the cream, about 1cm thick all over. Add a layer of strawberry slices, then repeat with the cream, biscuits and strawberries until you fill the tin, finishing on a layer of biscuit. You’ll have some strawberries left over to serve. Press everything down well so every biscuit is covered in cream. Cover and chill overnight.","STEP 3","To serve, flip the tin onto a serving plate, and remove the cling film. Whip the remaining 100ml cream with 1 tbsp icing sugar and dollop on top of the cake, swirling it around. Top with the remaining strawberry slices in lines, sift over the remaining 1 tbsp icing sugar, and sprinkle the biscuit crumbs in between the rows of strawberries. Cut into slices to serve."]
'Harissa & lamb sausage rolls', ["600g lamb mince","2 tbsp shop-bought harissa","¼ tsp ground ginger","1⁄2 tsp ground cinnamon","1⁄2 tsp ground cumin","2 tbsp chopped coriander","1 garlic clove , grated","1 preserved lemon , rind finely chopped (discard the flesh)","plain flour , for dusting","325g ready rolled puff pastry","1 large egg , lightly beaten","2 tsp black sesame seeds (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Mix together the lamb, harissa (see our recipe), spices, coriander, garlic, preserved lemon and seasoning in a bowl. Pummel it with your hands to make sure it’s well combined.","STEP 2","Lightly dust your work surface with flour and lay the puff pastry on top. Cut it down the middle lengthways, then roll each piece with a rolling pin so each piece measures about 14 x 42cm.","STEP 3","Divide the lamb mixture into four and roll each one into a sausage shape using your hands. Lay two\xa0of them, end to end, on one of the pieces of pastry. Brush some egg along one of the long sides of the pastry, just by the edge. Pull up the other side to encase the sausage shapes and press the sides together. Do the same with the rest of the meat and pastry.","STEP 4","Cut each pastry parcel into four. Transfer these to a baking sheet, then brush each sausage roll\xa0with the egg and sprinkle over the sesame seeds, if using. Bake for 20-25 mins, or until the pastry is puffed up and golden."]
'Triple-layered berry cheesecake', ["100g butter , melted, plus extra for the tin","200g digestive biscuits","2 gelatine leaves","50g raspberries","50g caster sugar , plus 2 tbsp","350g strawberries","500g full-fat soft cheese","250ml double cream","few drops red or pink food colouring","1 tbsp vanilla bean paste","50g white chocolate , melted","few drops lemon extract (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Butter and line the base and sides of a 20cm springform tin. Blitz the digestives in a food processor until you get fine crumbs, or bash in a sandwich bag with a rolling pin. Transfer to a bowl and stir in the melted butter until it looks like damp sand. Tip into the prepared tin, and smooth the mixture with the back of a spoon to make an even base, then chill.","STEP 2","Soak the gelatine leaves in cold water. Put the raspberries in a food processor or in a jug using a stick blender, and blitz to a smooth purée. Sieve out the seeds. Warm the raspberry sauce in a small pan with 1 tbsp sugar until just starting to steam, then pour over 1 drained gelatine\xa0leaf in a bowl and stir to dissolve.","STEP 3","Blitz 3 (about 65g) of the strawberries in a food processor, and warm through with 1 tbsp sugar in the same way. Tip into a bowl and stir in the other drained gelatine leaf.","STEP 4","Whisk the soft cheese, cream and caster sugar until it just starts to thicken. Divide between three bowls (about 260g per bowl). Fold the strawberry purée into one with a few drops of food colouring to make it light pink, the raspberry mix with the gelatine into another with more food colouring so it’s dark pink, and the vanilla bean paste into the third.","STEP 5","Spoon the raspberry filling over the biscuit base, smoothing the surface\xa0so it’s flat. Next, add the strawberry filling, gently smoothing over without disturbing the bottom layer, then repeat with the vanilla mixture, using a clean spoon to level the top. A spatula or knife might help with this to keep from dragging the below layers. Chill for 4 hrs or overnight.","STEP 6","Run a knife around the sides of the cake tin between the cheesecake and the parchment, and loosen the base. Transfer to a cake stand, and smooth the sides, using a palette knife, to neaten the layers. Mix the chocolate with a few drops of lemon extract, if using. Pile the remaining strawberries, some sliced, some whole, on top, and drizzle over the chocolate to finish."]
'Coconut chicken noodle salads', ["2 small or 1 large  chicken breast","3 slices ginger","1 stalk lemongrass","400ml coconut milk","150g egg noodles","1-2 tbsp peanut butter","handful green beans , trimmed and cut into lengths","12 cherry tomatoes , halved","2 handfuls baby spinach leaves"], ["STEP 1","Put the chicken, ginger, lemongrass and coconut milk in a pan and bring to a simmer. Add a pinch of salt, then reduce the heat and cook for 10-15 mins until the chicken is cooked through. Cool, then chill until cold.","STEP 2","Cook the noodles following pack instructions. Lift the chicken out of the coconut liquid and shred it, then stir the peanut butter into enough of the liquid to make a thick dressing.","STEP 3","Divide the noodles between four jars or boxes and spoon over the coconut dressing, or take it with you in a separate jar. Add the beans and tomatoes followed by the chicken and spinach. Seal the lid and chill the jars until you need to pack them. Serve in the jar or, for smaller children tip into bowls."]
'Harissa & lamb sausage rolls', ["600g lamb mince","2 tbsp shop-bought harissa","¼ tsp ground ginger","1⁄2 tsp ground cinnamon","1⁄2 tsp ground cumin","2 tbsp chopped coriander","1 garlic clove , grated","1 preserved lemon , rind finely chopped (discard the flesh)","plain flour , for dusting","325g ready rolled puff pastry","1 large egg , lightly beaten","2 tsp black sesame seeds (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Mix together the lamb, harissa (see our recipe), spices, coriander, garlic, preserved lemon and seasoning in a bowl. Pummel it with your hands to make sure it’s well combined.","STEP 2","Lightly dust your work surface with flour and lay the puff pastry on top. Cut it down the middle lengthways, then roll each piece with a rolling pin so each piece measures about 14 x 42cm.","STEP 3","Divide the lamb mixture into four and roll each one into a sausage shape using your hands. Lay two\xa0of them, end to end, on one of the pieces of pastry. Brush some egg along one of the long sides of the pastry, just by the edge. Pull up the other side to encase the sausage shapes and press the sides together. Do the same with the rest of the meat and pastry.","STEP 4","Cut each pastry parcel into four. Transfer these to a baking sheet, then brush each sausage roll\xa0with the egg and sprinkle over the sesame seeds, if using. Bake for 20-25 mins, or until the pastry is puffed up and golden."]
'Silly twits ice cream', ["4 eggs","1 tsp vanilla extract","140g caster sugar","300ml pot double cream"], ["STEP 1","Separate the eggs. Beat the yolks and and vanilla extract with an electric whisk until light and foamy. Clean the whisk, then in another bowl whisk the egg whites, gradually adding the caster sugar until it is thick and glossy, a bit like making meringues.","STEP 2","Lightly whip the double cream until it softly holds its shape. Mix with the yolks and egg white mixture until everything is combined. Turn into a container, cover and freeze until solid. Take out of the fridge about 10 mins before serving."]
'Charred nectarine & prosciutto panzanella', ["3 slices sourdough","4 tbsp olive oil","1 tbsp thyme leaves","1 tbsp capers","1⁄2 lemon , juiced","2 tsp Dijon mustard","4-6 ripe nectarines , halved and stoned","bunch of basil","50g sorrel or spinach leaves","handful of chervil","handful of tarragon","2 tbsp ricotta","100g prosciutto","handful of roasted hazelnuts , chopped"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Brush the bread with 1 tbsp of the olive oil and scatter over some sea salt and thyme leaves. Roast for 15 mins, turning once, until crispy and golden. Break up into a bowl and toss with the capers.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, whisk together the lemon juice, 2 tbsp olive oil, a pinch of salt and the mustard to make a dressing, then pour half over the bread.","STEP 3","Heat a grill pan to a high heat and sprinkle in some sea salt. Drizzle the nectarines with the remaining 1 tbsp oil and grill, flesh-side down, until charred. Add to the bowl with the bread, along with the basil, sorrel, chervil and tarragon.","STEP 4","Season and toss everything together, then pile onto a serving platter. Top with the ricotta, prosciutto and hazelnuts, and serve with the remaining dressing on the side, if you like."]
'Spiced hummingbird cake', ["225ml vegetable oil , plus extra for the tins","300g self-raising flour","½ tsp baking powder","300g golden caster sugar","1 tsp ground cinnamon","2 cardamom pods , cracked open and seeds finely crushed","whole nutmeg , for grating","2 very ripe bananas , mashed","3 medium eggs , beaten","150g pineapple chunks , from a can, drained and chopped","80g pecans , finely chopped","200g full-fat soft cheese","150g softened, unsalted butter","80g runny honey","80g icing sugar","1 large orange , zested","edible flowers and dried pineapple rings, to decorate (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Oil two 20cm, loose-bottomed cake tins and line the bottom of each one with baking parchment.","STEP 2","Sieve the flour into a large mixing bowl, and add 1/2 tsp salt and the baking powder. Stir through the sugar, cinnamon, cardamom and a very good grating of nutmeg. In a separate bowl, whisk the mashed bananas through the eggs and oil until well combined. Make a well in the centre of the dry ingredients and tip in the wet mixture. Fold everything together until combined, then mix through the pineapple and pecans. Spoon the mixture into the tins and bake in the centre of the oven for 35-45 mins or until a skewer inserted into the middle comes out clean. Leave to cool in the tins for about 10 mins before transferring to a wire rack to cool down completely.","STEP 3","Meanwhile, put the soft cheese, softened butter, honey and sugar into a mixing bowl and beat together until just combined. Try not to overbeat the mixture or it will become too soft and runny. Chill for 30 mins in the fridge before using.","STEP 4","Put one of the cakes on a serving plate and spread with half the icing. Top with the other cake and smooth over the remaining icing. Finish with shavings of orange zest, edible flowers and dried pineapple rings, if you like. Will keep in an airtight container for up to three days."]
'Apricot & pistachio frangipane blondies', ["100g unsalted butter , melted, plus a little extra for the tin","200g light muscovado sugar","½ tsp fennel seeds","1 large egg","120g plain flour","50g pistachios , roughly chopped","1-2 tbsp milk","6 large ripe apricots , halved and stoned","65g golden caster sugar","80g unsalted butter , softened","1 egg","100g pistachios , ground to crumbs"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6 and butter and line a rectangular baking tin, approx 20 x 25cm. To make the frangipane, beat together the sugar and butter until fluffy, then add the egg and pistachios.","STEP 2","In a bowl, stir together the muscovado sugar, fennel seeds and melted butter with a pinch of salt. Add the egg and stir vigorously, then tip in the flour and half the pistachios and fold until well combined and no streaks remain. Add the milk to loosen.","STEP 3","Spoon two-thirds of the batter into the tin and smooth with the back of a metal spoon or spatula, then arrange the apricot halves on top and press into the batter. Dot the frangipane around the batter too, then top with the remaining spoonfuls of batter so that it’s part covering the frangipane and apricots. Scatter over the rest of the pistachios. Bake for 25-30 mins until a skewer comes out with some crumbs that are a little moist, but not raw. Cool completely in the tin, then cut into 12 squares."]
'Easy cornflake tart', ["320g ready-rolled shortcrust pastry","plain flour, to dust","50g butter","125g golden syrup","25g light brown soft sugar","100g cornflakes","125g strawberry or raspberry jam","custard, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Unroll the pastry and briefly\xa0roll out\xa0on a lightly floured work surface\xa0until it\'s large enough\xa0to fit a 23cm loose-bottomed tart tin. Use the rolling pin to lift the pastry over the tin, then press into the corners and sides so the excess pastry hangs over the rim. Trim this away, leaving just a small amount of excess hanging over the rim.","STEP 2","Line the pastry with baking parchment\xa0and fill with baking beans or uncooked rice. Bake for 15 mins. Remove the parchment and beans, then bake for another 5-10 mins until just golden. Remove from the oven and trim any excess pastry from the edges using\xa0a serrated knife.","STEP 3","Heat the butter, syrup and sugar in a small pan with a pinch of salt, stirring frequently, until melted and smooth. Fold in the cornflakes to coat in the butter mixture.","STEP 4","Spoon the jam into the cooked pastry base, then level the surface.\xa0Tip\xa0the cornflake mixture over the jam and gently press down until all of the jam is covered with a layer of the mixture.\xa0Return the tart to the oven and bake\xa0for another 5 mins until the cornflakes are golden and toasted. Leave to cool until just warm\xa0before slicing\xa0and serving with custard."]
'Summer berry cake with rose geranium cream', ["325g butter , at room temperature, plus extra for the tins","425g caster sugar","2 tsp almond extract","½ lemon , finely zested","250g plain yogurt","4 large eggs , at room temperature","375g self-raising flour","225g ground almonds","200g mascarpone","300ml double cream","1 tbsp lemon juice","icing sugar , to taste, plus extra for dusting","1-2 tsp rose geranium water or rose water, to taste (see tip, below)","800g summer berries (raspberries, blackberries, redcurrants, blackcurrants, hulled strawberries and loganberries)","4 tbsp caster sugar","rose geranium flowers or other edible flowers"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Butter and line the bases of three 23cm cake tins. Cream the butter and sugar until light and fluffy, then add the almond extract and lemon zest. Use a fork to whisk the yogurt with the eggs. With the mixer on a low speed, add the flour, ground almonds and 1/2 tsp salt to the butter and sugar, alternating with the yogurt and eggs.","STEP 2","Divide the batter between the tins and bake for 35-40 mins or until a skewer inserted into the middle comes out clean. Cool in the tins for 5 mins, then turn out onto a wire rack, remove the parchment and leave to cool.","STEP 3","Beat the mascarpone to loosen it. Whip the cream until it holds its shape. Combine the cream, mascarpone and lemon juice, then carefully add the icing sugar and flower water to taste.","STEP 4","Assemble the cake just before serving. Toss the berries with the caster sugar. Spread the flattest cake with half the cream, then add half the fruit. Top with a second cake, spread with the rest of the cream and top with the rest of the fruit. Finish with the last cake, sift over icing sugar, then decorate with rose geranium petals and rose geranium leaves (as long as they’re small)."]
'Strawberry, feta & thyme tart', ["100g crème fraîche","3 thyme sprigs, leaves picked, plus extra to serve","100g vegetarian feta , crumbled","1⁄2 garlic clove , crushed","1⁄2 lemon , zested","pinch chilli flakes","1 sheet ready rolled puff pastry (about 320g)","200g strawberries , sliced","rocket salad , to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6, and put a baking sheet in the oven to warm up.","STEP 2","Mash the crème fraîche, thyme, feta, garlic, lemon, chilli and some seasoning in a bowl with a fork until fairly smooth.","STEP 3","Unravel the pastry onto a piece of baking parchment and score a 1cm border around the edge with a sharp knife. Spread the crème fraîche mixture onto the tart, smoothing over up to the border edges. Scatter the strawberry slices over and bake for 25 mins until golden and puffed up. Scatter over more thyme leaves and serve with a rocket salad and a chilled glass of rosé."]
'Gin & tonic cheesecake', ["250g digestive biscuits","100g butter , melted","600g cream cheese","100g icing sugar","zest and juice of 1 lime , plus extra zest to serve","50ml gin","280ml double cream","250ml can gin and tonic","2 tbsp caster sugar","1 lemon , half juiced, half finely sliced","2 medium meringues , crushed"], ["STEP 1","Butter and line a 23cm loose-bottomed tin with baking parchment. Put the digestive biscuits in a plastic food bag and crush to crumbs using a rolling pin, or blitz in a food processor. Transfer to a bowl, then pour over the melted butter. Mix thoroughly until the crumbs are completely coated. Tip them into the prepared tin and press firmly down into the base to create an even layer. Chill in the fridge for 1 hr to set firmly.","STEP 2","To make the filling, place the cream cheese, icing sugar and lime zest in a bowl, then beat with an electric whisk until smooth. Tip in the gin and double cream, and continue beating until the mixture is thick and completely combined. Now spoon it onto the biscuit base, and spread to the edges. Smooth the top of the cheesecake down with the back of a dessert spoon or spatula. Leave to set in the fridge overnight.","STEP 3","Pour the can of gin and tonic into a pan, add the caster sugar and lemon juice and boil hard. Once it has reduced to a syrup (about 3-4 minutes over high heat), cool a little, then add the lime juice and the slices of lemon and toss in the syrup. Allow to cool completely.","STEP 4","To serve, place the base of the cheesecake on top of a can, then gradually pull the sides of the tin down. Slip the cake onto a serving plate, removing the lining paper and base. Top with a handful of the crushed meringues, then drizzle with the syrup, scattering the lemon slices on top as you go. Add a final dusting of lime zest, slice and serve."]
'Veggie rainbow picnic pie', ["450g butternut squash , peeled, sliced and cut into small chunks","2 tbsp olive or rapeseed oil","1 large onion , sliced","550g small waxy potatoes , peeled and sliced","2 x 375g blocks all-butter puff pastry","flour , for dusting","1 x 320g ready-rolled sheet all-butter puff pastry","2 tbsp breadcrumbs","300g pack cooked beetroot , sliced","450g jar roasted red peppers , drained","200g block feta cheese","150g frozen peas","small bunch each parsley and mint, chopped","10 eggs","2 tbsp sesame seeds"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Toss the squash in 1 tbsp oil and some seasoning and roast for 20 mins until soft. Meanwhile, fry the onion in the remaining oil for 10-15 mins over a low heat until golden and boil the potatoes for 8 mins until soft. Drain the potatoes and leave the veg to cool.","STEP 2","Reduce oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Line a 20cm x 30cm baking tin with a long double thickness strip of parchment (this will help you to lift out the pie once cooked). Squeeze the two blocks of pastry together, then roll out on a floured surface – the pastry should be about the thickness of a £1 coin. Use the pastry to line the tin, leaving any excess pastry hanging over the edges.","STEP 3","Sprinkle the breadcrumbs over the base of the pastry. Layer in the beetroot slices, peppers, squash, onions, feta, potatoes, peas and herbs (in that order for a nice rainbow effect), seasoning well between each layer. Beat the eggs and pour slowly over the filling until most of it has sunk through the layers, saving a little to glaze the top. Brush some egg over the overhanging pastry then lay the rolled pastry sheet on top. Press the pastry sheets together, then use some kitchen scissors to trim the excess pastry, leaving about 2cm. Roll the edges in to seal, then press them firmly with a fork. Brush with egg, sprinkle with seeds, then use the fork prongs to mark out 12 portions. Bake for 1 hr 20 mins until the pastry is golden and crisp. Leave to cool completely before slicing, or chill for up to two days before serving."]
'Roast new potatoes & radishes', ["600g new potatoes , halved, larger ones quartered","500g radishes , halved, larger ones quartered","4 tbsp olive oil","2 tsp black mustard seeds","1 tsp chilli flakes , plus extra to serve (optional)","30g pumpkin seeds","150g Greek yogurt","2 spring onions , thinly sliced (green parts and all)"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Put the potatoes in a saucepan of water, bring to the boil and cook for 8 mins. Drain and leave to steam dry.","STEP 2","Put the potatoes in one roasting tin and the radishes into another. Divide the oil between them, along with the mustard seeds and chilli flakes. Season and give everything a good mix. Put in the oven and roast for 25 mins, then take out the radishes and roast the potatoes for an extra 10 mins until crisp. Meanwhile, toast the pumpkin seeds in a dry frying pan.","STEP 3","Spread the yogurt onto a sharing platter. Pile on the potatoes and radishes, then scatter over the spring onions, pumpkin seeds and a few more chilli flakes, if you like."]
'Smashed chicken with corn slaw', ["4 skinless chicken breast fillets","1 lime , zested and juiced","2 tbsp bio yogurt","1 tsp fresh thyme leaves","¼ tsp turmeric","2 tbsp finely chopped coriander","1 garlic clove , finely grated","1 tsp rapeseed oil","1 small avocado","1 lime , zested and juiced","2 tbsp bio yogurt","2 tbsp finely chopped coriander","160g corn , cut from 2 cobs","1 red pepper , deseeded and chopped","1 red onion , halved and finely sliced","320g white cabbage , finely sliced","150g new potatoes , boiled, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Cut the chicken breasts in half, then put them between two sheets of baking parchment and bash with a rolling pin to flatten. Mix the lime zest and juice with the yogurt, thyme, turmeric, coriander and garlic in a large bowl. Add the chicken and stir until well coated. Leave to marinate while you make the slaw.","STEP 2","Mash the avocado with the lime juice and zest, 2 tbsp yogurt and the coriander. Stir in the corn, red pepper, onion and cabbage.","STEP 3","Heat a large non-stick frying pan or griddle pan, then cook the chicken in batches for a few mins each side – they’ll cook quickly as they’re thin. Serve the hot chicken with the slaw and the new potatoes. If you\'re cooking for two, chill half\xa0the chicken and slaw for lunch another day (eat within two days)."]
'Griddled halloumi with watermelon & caper breadcrumbs', ["750g watermelon","2 small shallots , very finely sliced","100ml extra virgin olive oil , plus extra for brushing and to serve","4 tsp white balsamic vinegar","300g halloumi , sliced","good squeeze of lemon juice","75g slightly stale country bread , crusts removed, blitzed into coarse breadcrumbs","1-2 cloves garlic , finely chopped","½ medium red chilli , halved, deseeded and chopped","2½ tbsp capers , rinsed","50g blanched almonds , toasted and chopped","small bunch of mint , leaves picked, half of them torn"], ["STEP 1","Cut the watermelon into either cubes or slices and transfer to a bowl with the shallots. Add 4 tbsp extra virgin olive oil and the balsamic, then season with fresh black pepper. Cover and put in the fridge for about 15-20 mins.","STEP 2","Heat the remaining oil in a frying pan. Fry the breadcrumbs until turning gold. Add the garlic, chilli and capers and cook for another minute, then toss in the almonds. Remove from the heat, add the torn mint (it will wilt a little), then taste – it will be quite salty, but the watermelon won’t be, so you’ll get a good contrast.","STEP 3","Brush the halloumi with a little oil and heat a griddle pan. Griddle the cheese on both sides until just starting to melt but still holding its shape, with nice golden griddle marks. Toss the cold watermelon and shallots with the rest of the mint leaves and some salt. Divide between four plates, or pile onto a platter. Put the hot halloumi on top. Squeeze over some lemon juice and top with some of the breadcrumb and caper mix. Serve immediately."]
'Chipotle gazpacho', ["1kg ripe tomatoes , roughly chopped","1 large red pepper , deseeded and roughly chopped","½ cucumber , sliced","4 spring onions , finely sliced","1 small garlic clove , grated","40g blanched almonds , roughly chopped","3 limes , juiced","2 tbsp olive oil","2 tsp chipotle paste","1 large, ripe avocado , cubed","1 small red chilli , deseeded and finely chopped","½ small bunch coriander , finely chopped"], ["STEP 1","Put the tomatoes, pepper, cucumber, two of the spring onions, the garlic, half the almonds, half\xa0the lime juice, and all the olive oil and chipotle paste into a blender. Whizz until almost smooth. Pour into a jug and chill for at least 2 hrs.","STEP 2","When ready to eat, toss the remaining spring onion, avocado, chilli and coriander with the remaining lime juice. Ladle the soup into four bowls and top with the avocado salsa and reserved almonds."]
'Crab & avocado tostadas', ["1 small  red onion , sliced into thin rings","juice 2  limes , plus wedges to serve","pinch of  caster sugar","170g can white crabmeat in brine, drained","2 spring onions , finely sliced","1 red chilli , deseeded and chopped","1 really ripe avocado , peeled, stoned and chopped","1 small garlic clove , crushed","2 corn tortillas","handful mixed salad leaves"], ["STEP 1","Put the onion in a bowl and cover with half the lime juice and a good pinch each of sugar and salt. Leave to soften while you get everything else ready.","STEP 2","Mix together the crabmeat, spring onions and half the chilli. Season with black pepper and set aside. Mash the avocado with the remaining lime juice, garlic and some seasoning. You can leave it quite chunky or mash it until smooth. Stir in the rest of the chilli.","STEP 3","Bend each tortilla in half and toast in a toaster for 1 min. Put on 2 plates and top with the salad leaves, then mashed avocado. Finish with the crabmeat and drained pickled onion. Serve with lime wedges for squeezing over."]
'Tomato, burrata & broad bean salad', ["500g tomatoes (I used a mix of sizes and colours)","1⁄2 tsp caster sugar","150g broad beans , podded","handful basil","handful chives","handful flat leaf parsley","1 tbsp tarragon","1 tbsp lovage","1 tbsp mint leaves","3 tbsp olive oil","2 tsp Dijon mustard","pinch of fennel seeds","1 lemon , zested","1 tbsp red wine vinegar","2 x 100g burrata or 2 x 125g balls mozzarella","50g hazelnuts , toasted and roughly chopped"], ["STEP 1","Chop the tomatoes into a mixture of slices and wedges, then put them in a bowl. Toss with 1/2 tsp salt and the sugar, then leave to marinate for 30 mins. Meanwhile, bring a pan of water to the boil and add the broad beans. Boil for 2 mins, then drain and allow to cool for a couple of mins. Peel them out of their shells. This is a bit fiddly but well worth it – I use my thumbnail to pierce the skin, then gently squeeze out the shiny green beans.","STEP 2","Finely chop the herbs, then tip into a bowl and whisk in the olive oil, mustard, fennel seeds, most of the lemon zest, and red wine vinegar. Season, then stir in the broad beans.","STEP 3","Tip the tomatoes onto a serving platter. Top with the burrata, then spoon over the broad bean salsa. Scatter over the hazelnuts and remaining lemon zest to serve."]
'Swedish meatballs with beetroot & apple salad', ["500g lean pork mince (5% fat)","100g coarsely grated courgette , squeezed of excess juice","1 onion , grated","4 tbsp chopped fresh dill","2 garlic cloves , finely grated","1 egg","1 tbsp rapeseed oil","1 tsp thyme leaves","2 tsp vegetable bouillon powder , made up to 300ml with boiling water","2 tbsp half-fat crème fraîche","1 large apple , chopped","1 red onion , halved and thinly sliced","4 tbsp chopped parsley","2 tsp capers","½ lemon , juiced","320g cooked beetroot , cut into strips"], ["STEP 1","To make the meatballs, tip the pork into a bowl and add the grated courgette and onion, half the dill, half the garlic and plenty of black pepper. Break in the egg and mix well with your hands. When everything is well combined, break off walnut-size pieces and roll into balls – you should end up with about 28. The mixture will be very soft.","STEP 2","Heat the oil in a large non-stick frying pan then gently fry the meatballs in two batches until firm and pale golden, turning them every now and then so they brown evenly. Each batch should take 6-8 mins.","STEP 3","Wipe out the pan to remove excess fat and add the remaining garlic and thyme, then pour in the bouillon and bring to the boil. Turn off the heat, stir in the crème fraîche and remaining dill, then return the meatballs to the pan and turn them in the mixture until coated.","STEP 4","For the salad, mix the apple, onion, parsley and capers with the lemon, then stir through the beetroot. Serve the salad alongside the meatballs. If you’re cooking for two people, eat half the meatballs and salad now, and chill the rest for another day – it will keep in the fridge for up to three days. Reheat the meatballs in the microwave until piping hot."]
'Salted tomato salad', ["300g heritage tomatoes , various shapes and sizes","1 red onion","1 garlic clove","8 small basil leaves","1 tbsp olive oil","1 tbsp nigella seeds"], ["STEP 1","Chop the tomatoes into equal-sized chunks and slice the onion, then transfer them to a bowl. Grate the garlic, then add to the tomatoes, along with the basil leaves.","STEP 2","Sprinkle with ½ tsp salt, pour over the oil and toss together. Leave to infuse for up to 30 mins, then serve sprinkled with nigella seeds."]
'Roasted vegetables', ["3 tbsp olive oil","1 aubergine, cut into chunks","2 mixed coloured peppers, such as orange and red, cut into chunks","1 red onion, cut into wedges","2 courgettes, cut into chunks","4 garlic cloves, smashed","3 sprigs of thyme","200g cherry tomatoes","handful of basil leaves","zest of 1 lemon","50g feta, crumbled"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 200C/180C Fan/gas 6. Mix the oil with the aubergine, peppers, red onion, courgette, garlic and thyme in a bowl with sea salt and black pepper. Tip into a large roasting tin then roast for 30 mins. Add the tomatoes to the pan and return to the oven for 10 mins.","STEP 2","Squeeze the garlic from their skins, remove the thyme then scatter over the basil, lemon zest and crumbled feta."]
'Strawberry shortbread ice cream sandwich', ["4 scoops strawberry cheesecake ice cream , softened","a few fresh strawberries , finely chopped","8 Viennese whirls (or shortbread biscuits)"], ["STEP 1","Mix the ice cream with the strawberries and freeze until solid.","STEP 2","Sandwich spoonfuls of the ice cream between the biscuits, then eat immediately."]
'Cheesy seafood bake', ["300g medium potatoes (about 3), thinly sliced","2 tbsp milk","40g mature cheddar , finely grated","1 tsp rapeseed oil","1 onion (160g), finely chopped","1 red pepper , deseeded and finely diced (270g)","2 tsp balsamic vinegar","1 tsp vegetable bouillon powder","400g can chopped tomatoes","½ x 30g pack basil , leaves picked and finely chopped","1 garlic clove , finely grated","280g pack skinless cod loins","100g frozen small Atlantic cooked prawns , defrosted","160g broccoli florets"], ["STEP 1","Boil the potato slices for 10 mins then drain, tip into a bowl and gently mix in the milk and half the cheese. Don’t worry if the potatoes break up a little.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, heat the oil in a large frying pan and cook the onion until softened. Stir in the pepper and cook for 5 mins more. Spoon in the balsamic vinegar and bouillon powder, then stir in the tomatoes, basil and garlic. Lay the cod fillets on top, then cover and cook for 6-8 mins until the cod flakes when tested. Heat the grill to high.","STEP 3","Take off the heat, stir in the prawns and tip into a shallow baking dish, breaking up the cod into large chunks. Cover with the potatoes and sprinkle with the remaining cheese. Grill until golden. While it’s grilling, steam or boil the broccoli to serve with the bake."]
'Cheesy seafood bake', ["300g medium potatoes (about 3), thinly sliced","2 tbsp milk","40g mature cheddar , finely grated","1 tsp rapeseed oil","1 onion (160g), finely chopped","1 red pepper , deseeded and finely diced (270g)","2 tsp balsamic vinegar","1 tsp vegetable bouillon powder","400g can chopped tomatoes","½ x 30g pack basil , leaves picked and finely chopped","1 garlic clove , finely grated","280g pack skinless cod loins","100g frozen small Atlantic cooked prawns , defrosted","160g broccoli florets"], ["STEP 1","Boil the potato slices for 10 mins then drain, tip into a bowl and gently mix in the milk and half the cheese. Don’t worry if the potatoes break up a little.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, heat the oil in a large frying pan and cook the onion until softened. Stir in the pepper and cook for 5 mins more. Spoon in the balsamic vinegar and bouillon powder, then stir in the tomatoes, basil and garlic. Lay the cod fillets on top, then cover and cook for 6-8 mins until the cod flakes when tested. Heat the grill to high.","STEP 3","Take off the heat, stir in the prawns and tip into a shallow baking dish, breaking up the cod into large chunks. Cover with the potatoes and sprinkle with the remaining cheese. Grill until golden. While it’s grilling, steam or boil the broccoli to serve with the bake."]
'Bean, feta & herb dip', ["400g can cannellini bean","200g feta cheese","1 tbsp lemon juice","1 garlic clove , crushed","3 tbsp chopped dill, mint or  chives (or 1 tbsp each)"], ["STEP 1","Drain and rinse beans. Tip into a food processor with feta, lemon juice and garlic, and whizz until smooth. Add dill, mint or chives, and season with pepper."]
'Summer egg salad with basil & peas', ["150g new potatoes , thickly sliced","160g French beans , trimmed","160g frozen peas","3 eggs","160g romaine lettuce , roughly torn into pieces","1 tbsp extra virgin olive oil","2 tsp cider vinegar","½ tsp English mustard powder","2 tbsp chopped mint","3 tbsp chopped basil","1 garlic clove , finely grated","1 tbsp capers"], ["STEP 1","Cook the potatoes in a pan of simmering water for 5 mins. Add the beans and cook 5 mins more, then tip in the peas and cook for 2 mins until all the vegetables are just tender. Meanwhile, boil the eggs in another pan for 8 mins. Drain and run under cold water, then carefully shell and halve.","STEP 2","Mix all the dressing ingredients together in a large bowl with a good grinding of black pepper, crushing the herbs and capers with the back of a spoon to intensify their flavours.","STEP 3","Mix the warm vegetables into the dressing to coat, then add the lettuce and toss everything together. Pile onto plates, top with the eggs and grind over some black pepper to serve."]
'Pepper & lemon spaghetti with basil & pine nuts', ["1 tbsp rapeseed oil","1 red pepper , deseeded and diced","150g wholemeal spaghetti","2 courgettes (250g), grated","2 garlic cloves , finely grated","1 lemon , zested and juiced","15g basil , finely chopped","25g pine nuts , toasted","2 tbsp finely grated parmesan or vegetarian alternative (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a large non-stick frying pan. Add the pepper and cook for 5 mins. Meanwhile, cook the pasta for 10-12 mins until tender.","STEP 2","Add the courgette and garlic to the pepper and cook, stirring very frequently, for 10-15 mins until the courgette is really soft.","STEP 3","Stir in the lemon zest and juice, basil and spaghetti (reserve some pasta water) and toss together, adding a little of the pasta water until nicely coated. Add the pine nuts, then spoon into bowls and serve topped with the parmesan, if using."]
'Summer berry cake with rose geranium cream', ["325g butter , at room temperature, plus extra for the tins","425g caster sugar","2 tsp almond extract","½ lemon , finely zested","250g plain yogurt","4 large eggs , at room temperature","375g self-raising flour","225g ground almonds","200g mascarpone","300ml double cream","1 tbsp lemon juice","icing sugar , to taste, plus extra for dusting","1-2 tsp rose geranium water or rose water, to taste (see tip, below)","800g summer berries (raspberries, blackberries, redcurrants, blackcurrants, hulled strawberries and loganberries)","4 tbsp caster sugar","rose geranium flowers or other edible flowers"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Butter and line the bases of three 23cm cake tins. Cream the butter and sugar until light and fluffy, then add the almond extract and lemon zest. Use a fork to whisk the yogurt with the eggs. With the mixer on a low speed, add the flour, ground almonds and 1/2 tsp salt to the butter and sugar, alternating with the yogurt and eggs.","STEP 2","Divide the batter between the tins and bake for 35-40 mins or until a skewer inserted into the middle comes out clean. Cool in the tins for 5 mins, then turn out onto a wire rack, remove the parchment and leave to cool.","STEP 3","Beat the mascarpone to loosen it. Whip the cream until it holds its shape. Combine the cream, mascarpone and lemon juice, then carefully add the icing sugar and flower water to taste.","STEP 4","Assemble the cake just before serving. Toss the berries with the caster sugar. Spread the flattest cake with half the cream, then add half the fruit. Top with a second cake, spread with the rest of the cream and top with the rest of the fruit. Finish with the last cake, sift over icing sugar, then decorate with rose geranium petals and rose geranium leaves (as long as they’re small)."]
'Easy vanilla cupcakes', ["110g butter , softened","110g golden caster sugar","2 eggs","1 tsp vanilla extract","110g self-raising flour","1-2 tbsp milk , plus a little extra for the icing","125g butter , softened","185g icing sugar"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Line 12 holes in a shallow muffin tin with cupcake cases (not muffin cases). Cream the butter and sugar together until the mixture is light and fluffy. Beat the eggs and vanilla in a jug, then beat into the butter mixture a little at a time.","STEP 2","Fold the flour into the mixture along with a little milk – the mixture should fall easily off a spoon. Divide the mixture between the cases, filling each one no more than half full.","STEP 3","Cook the cakes for 12-15 mins – they should be firm to the touch and slightly golden brown. Cool in the tin for 5 mins, then lift them out gently and leave to cool completely.","STEP 4","To make the icing, beat the butter until it is very soft. Beat in the icing sugar a little at a time, then beat in a splash of the milk as you need to give you a soft icing that can be piped easily. Scrape the icing into an icing bag fitted with a star nozzle. Ice the cakes in swirls, starting in the centre and working outwards."]
'Halloumi & quinoa fattoush', ["2 brown pittas , torn into pieces","5 tbsp olive oil","2 lemons , juiced","1 garlic clove , crushed","250g block halloumi , sliced","250g microwavable pouch  quinoa","350g medium  tomatoes , quartered","1 large  cucumber , halved, deseeded and sliced","4 spring onions , sliced","½ small bunch  mint , chopped","½ small bunch  dill , roughly chopped"], ["STEP 1","Heat the grill to high. Toss the pitta pieces with 1 tbsp oil and spread out onto a baking sheet. Grill for 3-4 mins, turning halfway, until golden and crisp. Set aside to cool.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, whisk together the remaining oil with the lemon juice and garlic, then season. Heat a large griddle pan or non-stick frying pan over a high heat and cook the halloumi for 1-2 mins on each side or until lightly charred.","STEP 3","Cook the quinoa following pack instructions, leave to cool, then toss with the tomatoes, cucumber, spring onion, most of the fresh herbs and the dressing. Season to taste. Tip onto a serving plate and top with the halloumi, pitta and remaining herbs."]
'Rustic beans & spinach with garlic yogurt', ["2 tbsp rapeseed oil","1 large onion , halved and sliced","170g carrots , cut into small chunks","5 garlic cloves , 3 finely sliced and 2 crushed","1 tbsp sherry vinegar","1 red pepper , deseeded and chopped","½ tsp vegetable bouillon powder , made up to 250ml with boiling water","2 rosemary sprigs","1 tbsp smoked paprika , plus a pinch to serve","150g whole cherry tomatoes","1 ½ tbsp tomato purée","400g and 210g cans butter beans , drained","2 x 120g pots bio yogurt","160g baby spinach","squeeze lemon (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a large pan and fry the onion, carrots and sliced garlic, stirring frequently for 10 mins until the veg starts to caramelise. Pour in the sherry vinegar, allowing it to sizzle in the heat, then add the pepper, bouillon, rosemary, paprika, cherry tomatoes, tomato purée and beans, and cook for 15 mins. Meanwhile, stir the yogurt and crushed garlic together.","STEP 2","Stir the spinach into the pan and cook until wilted, adding a splash of water if you need to. Add some lemon juice to taste if you like, then serve in bowls topped with a dollop of the yogurt, a pinch of paprika and a good grinding of black pepper."]
'Peach & orange yogurt pots with ginger oats', ["4 peaches or nectarines, stoned and diced","1 orange , juiced and zested","120g porridge oats","25g pine nuts","½ tsp ground ginger","1 tsp ground cinnamon","2 tbsp sultanas","4 x 150ml pots bio yogurt"], ["STEP 1","Put the peaches and orange juice in a small pan. Put the lid on and cook gently for 3-5 mins, depending on their ripeness, until softened. Set aside to cool.","STEP 2","Tip the oats and pine nuts into a pan and heat gently, stirring frequently until they’re just starting to toast. Turn off the heat and add the spices, zest and sultanas.","STEP 3","Spoon the peaches and juices into four tumblers and top with the yogurt. Cover and chill until needed. Keep the oat mixture in an airtight container. When ready to serve, top the peaches and yogurt with the oat mixture."]
'Strawberry, feta & thyme tart', ["100g crème fraîche","3 thyme sprigs, leaves picked, plus extra to serve","100g vegetarian feta , crumbled","1⁄2 garlic clove , crushed","1⁄2 lemon , zested","pinch chilli flakes","1 sheet ready rolled puff pastry (about 320g)","200g strawberries , sliced","rocket salad , to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6, and put a baking sheet in the oven to warm up.","STEP 2","Mash the crème fraîche, thyme, feta, garlic, lemon, chilli and some seasoning in a bowl with a fork until fairly smooth.","STEP 3","Unravel the pastry onto a piece of baking parchment and score a 1cm border around the edge with a sharp knife. Spread the crème fraîche mixture onto the tart, smoothing over up to the border edges. Scatter the strawberry slices over and bake for 25 mins until golden and puffed up. Scatter over more thyme leaves and serve with a rocket salad and a chilled glass of rosé."]
'Silly twits ice cream', ["4 eggs","1 tsp vanilla extract","140g caster sugar","300ml pot double cream"], ["STEP 1","Separate the eggs. Beat the yolks and and vanilla extract with an electric whisk until light and foamy. Clean the whisk, then in another bowl whisk the egg whites, gradually adding the caster sugar until it is thick and glossy, a bit like making meringues.","STEP 2","Lightly whip the double cream until it softly holds its shape. Mix with the yolks and egg white mixture until everything is combined. Turn into a container, cover and freeze until solid. Take out of the fridge about 10 mins before serving."]
'Veggie rainbow picnic pie', ["450g butternut squash , peeled, sliced and cut into small chunks","2 tbsp olive or rapeseed oil","1 large onion , sliced","550g small waxy potatoes , peeled and sliced","2 x 375g blocks all-butter puff pastry","flour , for dusting","1 x 320g ready-rolled sheet all-butter puff pastry","2 tbsp breadcrumbs","300g pack cooked beetroot , sliced","450g jar roasted red peppers , drained","200g block feta cheese","150g frozen peas","small bunch each parsley and mint, chopped","10 eggs","2 tbsp sesame seeds"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Toss the squash in 1 tbsp oil and some seasoning and roast for 20 mins until soft. Meanwhile, fry the onion in the remaining oil for 10-15 mins over a low heat until golden and boil the potatoes for 8 mins until soft. Drain the potatoes and leave the veg to cool.","STEP 2","Reduce oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Line a 20cm x 30cm baking tin with a long double thickness strip of parchment (this will help you to lift out the pie once cooked). Squeeze the two blocks of pastry together, then roll out on a floured surface – the pastry should be about the thickness of a £1 coin. Use the pastry to line the tin, leaving any excess pastry hanging over the edges.","STEP 3","Sprinkle the breadcrumbs over the base of the pastry. Layer in the beetroot slices, peppers, squash, onions, feta, potatoes, peas and herbs (in that order for a nice rainbow effect), seasoning well between each layer. Beat the eggs and pour slowly over the filling until most of it has sunk through the layers, saving a little to glaze the top. Brush some egg over the overhanging pastry then lay the rolled pastry sheet on top. Press the pastry sheets together, then use some kitchen scissors to trim the excess pastry, leaving about 2cm. Roll the edges in to seal, then press them firmly with a fork. Brush with egg, sprinkle with seeds, then use the fork prongs to mark out 12 portions. Bake for 1 hr 20 mins until the pastry is golden and crisp. Leave to cool completely before slicing, or chill for up to two days before serving."]
'Strawberry & elderflower gateau', ["2 x 200g sponge flan cases (25cm)","6 tbsp strawberry jam or conserve","400g strawberries (look for ones that are a similar size), halved","600ml double cream","2 tbsp icing sugar , plus 150g","5 tbsp elderflower cordial","5-6 raspberries or some pink food colouring gel","small handful pistachios (optional), slivered or roughly chopped (see tip)","strawberry coulis or cream, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Remove the base of a 20cm loose-bottomed cake tin (make sure it’s a deep one) and use it as a template to cut out a circle from each flan case. Chop the offcuts from the flans into small pieces and set aside. Reassemble the tin and line it with a couple of sheets of cling film, leaving enough overhanging to wrap up once the tin is filled.","STEP 2","Put one flan disc in the base of the tin and spread over half the jam. Arrange the strawberries around the outside with the cut surface facing outwards. If you have any particularly large or small strawberries, put them to one side.","STEP 3","Whip the cream, 2 tbsp icing sugar and 3 tbsp elderflower cordial together in a bowl until the mixture holds its shape. Chop the reserved strawberries, then fold them into the cream mixture. Use half of the cream to fill the centre of the gateau, spreading right to the edges so it holds the strawberries in place.","STEP 4","Push a single layer of the chopped flan offcuts into the cream (you may have some leftovers to nibble on), and drizzle over the remaining elderflower cordial. Stir the remaining jam through the rest of the cream, spread it over the flan pieces, and top with the final piece of flan. Fold over the cling film and give the gateau a gentle press down to compact the layers. Chill while you make the icing. Can be chilled for up to 24 hrs.","STEP 5","Crush the raspberries with the back of a fork and stir in the 150g icing sugar to make a thick icing. Add a splash of water if it’s too thick. Alternatively, add enough water to the icing sugar to make a thick icing, then stir in a few drops of pink food colouring.","STEP 6","When you’re ready to serve, remove the cake from the tin and discard the cling film, then transfer to a cake stand. Spread the icing right to the edges, then scatter the pistachios in a ring around the top, if using, and serve with a little strawberry coulis or cream on the side, if you like."]
'Salmon picnic platter', ["4 eggs","2-3 tbsp mayonnaise","a little cayenne pepper","200g cooked salmon","100g hot-smoked salmon","6 small rolls , halved","3 tbsp cream cheese","100g smoked salmon","1 lemon , 1/2 zested and 1/2 cut into wedges","½ cucumber","2 tbsp Greek yogurt","1 tbsp chopped dill or chives","bread , soft rolls or wraps, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Hard boil the eggs by cooking them in boiling water for 8 mins, then cool quickly under cold running water and peel. Halve the eggs and pop the yolks into a bowl. Mash the yolks with the mayonnaise, cayenne pepper and some seasoning. Spoon or pipe the mixture back into the egg halves and chill until you need them.","STEP 2","Flake the cooked salmon into large chunks and put it on a platter with the hot-smoked salmon and the eggs.","STEP 3","Spread the bottom half of the rolls with cream cheese, then add the smoked salmon and a squeeze of lemon juice and top with the other half of the roll. Cut each one in half.","STEP 4","Peel and slice the cucumber. Mix the yogurt with the dill, lemon zest and some seasoning, then stir in the cucumber. Pile the mixture into the centre of the platter. Serve with extra bread, rolls or wraps and lemon wedges."]
'Roasted asparagus & pea salad', ["3 tbsp natural yogurt","1 tsp wholegrain mustard","½ tsp honey","½ lemon , zested and juiced","100g watercress","1 large slice sourdough bread","200g asparagus , tough ends removed","1 ½ tbsp cold-pressed rapeseed oil","2 eggs","200g frozen peas"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 220C/200C fan/gas 7. Mix the yogurt, mustard and honey together. Add the lemon zest, then add the juice and some seasoning to taste. Squeeze any remaining lemon juice over the watercress.","STEP 2","Tear the bread into rough chunks and put them on a large roasting tray with the asparagus. Toss both in the rapeseed oil and seasoning, and roast for 10 mins until the asparagus is tender and croutons are golden.","STEP 3","Meanwhile, cook the eggs in a pan of boiling water for 6 mins, then add the frozen peas and cook for 1 min more. Drain and rinse both under cold water until cool. Peel the eggs, then cut into quarters.","STEP 4","To assemble, mix the asparagus and peas through the watercress, then toss through the creamy dressing. Nestle in the eggs and croutons, and serve."]
'Lamb kebab burger', ["2 tbsp fat-free yogurt","1 tbsp mayonnaise","1 small  garlic clove , grated","½ tbsp vegetable oil","2 lamb burgers","2 sesame seed burger buns","1 tomato , sliced","20g gherkins , sliced","1 red chilli , finely sliced","leaves of 1 Baby Gem lettuce"], ["STEP 1","Combine the yogurt with the mayonnaise and grated garlic\xa0in\xa0a small bowl. Heat the\xa0vegetable oil in a non-stick frying pan over a medium heat, add the lamb burgers and fry for around 10 mins, turning over halfway through, until piping hot in the centre. Lightly toast the burger buns. Divide the\xa0sliced tomato,\xa0sliced gherkins, the burgers, some garlic sauce, chilli and the lettuce leaves\xa0between each burger bun, then enjoy immediately."]
'Halloumi & quinoa fattoush', ["2 brown pittas , torn into pieces","5 tbsp olive oil","2 lemons , juiced","1 garlic clove , crushed","250g block halloumi , sliced","250g microwavable pouch  quinoa","350g medium  tomatoes , quartered","1 large  cucumber , halved, deseeded and sliced","4 spring onions , sliced","½ small bunch  mint , chopped","½ small bunch  dill , roughly chopped"], ["STEP 1","Heat the grill to high. Toss the pitta pieces with 1 tbsp oil and spread out onto a baking sheet. Grill for 3-4 mins, turning halfway, until golden and crisp. Set aside to cool.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, whisk together the remaining oil with the lemon juice and garlic, then season. Heat a large griddle pan or non-stick frying pan over a high heat and cook the halloumi for 1-2 mins on each side or until lightly charred.","STEP 3","Cook the quinoa following pack instructions, leave to cool, then toss with the tomatoes, cucumber, spring onion, most of the fresh herbs and the dressing. Season to taste. Tip onto a serving plate and top with the halloumi, pitta and remaining herbs."]
'Lemon & yogurt chicken flatbreads', ["2 skinless chicken breasts , cut into strips","1 lemon","1 tsp dried oregano (optional)","1 garlic clove , crushed","pinch of cinnamon","1 tbsp olive oil","4 flatbreads","4 tbsp Greek yogurt","¼ red pepper , finely chopped","1 Little Gem lettuce , finely chopped"], ["STEP 1","Put the chicken in a bowl. Pare strips of zest from the lemon using a vegetable peeler, then juice the lemon too. Add the peel and half the juice to the chicken, along with the oregano (if using), garlic, cinnamon and oil. Mix well, cover and chill for an hour. The lemon juice will start to ‘cook’ the chicken, so don’t leave for longer.","STEP 2","Heat the barbecue. If you are using coals, wait until they turn white. If you are indoors, heat a griddle pan. Thread the chicken strips onto a couple of metal skewers to stop them falling through the grate (you don’t need to do this for the griddle), then grill for a couple of mins each side. The strips will cook through quickly so don’t leave them too long. Season if you like.","STEP 3","Warm the flatbreads on the edge of the barbecue (or on the griddle) for a minute, then transfer them to plates and spread each with ½ tbsp yogurt. Divide the chicken strips between them, then dot on the remaining yogurt and sprinkle over the pepper and lettuce. Fold or roll the flatbreads to eat."]
'Triple-layered berry cheesecake', ["100g butter , melted, plus extra for the tin","200g digestive biscuits","2 gelatine leaves","50g raspberries","50g caster sugar , plus 2 tbsp","350g strawberries","500g full-fat soft cheese","250ml double cream","few drops red or pink food colouring","1 tbsp vanilla bean paste","50g white chocolate , melted","few drops lemon extract (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Butter and line the base and sides of a 20cm springform tin. Blitz the digestives in a food processor until you get fine crumbs, or bash in a sandwich bag with a rolling pin. Transfer to a bowl and stir in the melted butter until it looks like damp sand. Tip into the prepared tin, and smooth the mixture with the back of a spoon to make an even base, then chill.","STEP 2","Soak the gelatine leaves in cold water. Put the raspberries in a food processor or in a jug using a stick blender, and blitz to a smooth purée. Sieve out the seeds. Warm the raspberry sauce in a small pan with 1 tbsp sugar until just starting to steam, then pour over 1 drained gelatine\xa0leaf in a bowl and stir to dissolve.","STEP 3","Blitz 3 (about 65g) of the strawberries in a food processor, and warm through with 1 tbsp sugar in the same way. Tip into a bowl and stir in the other drained gelatine leaf.","STEP 4","Whisk the soft cheese, cream and caster sugar until it just starts to thicken. Divide between three bowls (about 260g per bowl). Fold the strawberry purée into one with a few drops of food colouring to make it light pink, the raspberry mix with the gelatine into another with more food colouring so it’s dark pink, and the vanilla bean paste into the third.","STEP 5","Spoon the raspberry filling over the biscuit base, smoothing the surface\xa0so it’s flat. Next, add the strawberry filling, gently smoothing over without disturbing the bottom layer, then repeat with the vanilla mixture, using a clean spoon to level the top. A spatula or knife might help with this to keep from dragging the below layers. Chill for 4 hrs or overnight.","STEP 6","Run a knife around the sides of the cake tin between the cheesecake and the parchment, and loosen the base. Transfer to a cake stand, and smooth the sides, using a palette knife, to neaten the layers. Mix the chocolate with a few drops of lemon extract, if using. Pile the remaining strawberries, some sliced, some whole, on top, and drizzle over the chocolate to finish."]
'Silly twits ice cream', ["4 eggs","1 tsp vanilla extract","140g caster sugar","300ml pot double cream"], ["STEP 1","Separate the eggs. Beat the yolks and and vanilla extract with an electric whisk until light and foamy. Clean the whisk, then in another bowl whisk the egg whites, gradually adding the caster sugar until it is thick and glossy, a bit like making meringues.","STEP 2","Lightly whip the double cream until it softly holds its shape. Mix with the yolks and egg white mixture until everything is combined. Turn into a container, cover and freeze until solid. Take out of the fridge about 10 mins before serving."]
'Raspberry cordial', ["500g raspberry","500g caster sugar","3 tbsp red wine vinegar"], ["STEP 1","Put the raspberries in a pan with the sugar and vinegar. Mash over a low heat for 10 mins until smooth and syrupy. Rub through a sieve into a clean pan.","STEP 2","Tip the seeds from the sieve into a bowl and stir in 300ml water, then sieve again to remove the last of the pulp from seeds. Pour the liquid into the pan with the sieved pulp, stir well and boil for 1 min. Pour into small sterilised bottles and seal. The cordial will keep unopened for a few months. Once opened, store in the fridge."]
'Roast new potatoes & radishes', ["600g new potatoes , halved, larger ones quartered","500g radishes , halved, larger ones quartered","4 tbsp olive oil","2 tsp black mustard seeds","1 tsp chilli flakes , plus extra to serve (optional)","30g pumpkin seeds","150g Greek yogurt","2 spring onions , thinly sliced (green parts and all)"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Put the potatoes in a saucepan of water, bring to the boil and cook for 8 mins. Drain and leave to steam dry.","STEP 2","Put the potatoes in one roasting tin and the radishes into another. Divide the oil between them, along with the mustard seeds and chilli flakes. Season and give everything a good mix. Put in the oven and roast for 25 mins, then take out the radishes and roast the potatoes for an extra 10 mins until crisp. Meanwhile, toast the pumpkin seeds in a dry frying pan.","STEP 3","Spread the yogurt onto a sharing platter. Pile on the potatoes and radishes, then scatter over the spring onions, pumpkin seeds and a few more chilli flakes, if you like."]
'Stuffed rainbow baguette', ["1 artisan-style baguette","4 tbsp hummus","8 slices medium  cheddar","¼ red pepper , thinly sliced","¼ cooked beetroot , shredded","2 radishes , thinly sliced","1 yellow or orange carrot , shredded or grated","handful green leaves","1 tbsp vegetarian pesto , mixed with 1 tbsp olive oil"], ["STEP 1","Cut the baguette in half so you can open it out like a book. Spread the hummus over the bottom half of the baguette and add the cheese, breaking the slices up if you need to. Scatter the pepper, beetroot, radish and carrot along the baguette, then add the leaves, dribble with the pesto and close the baguette.","STEP 2","Wrap the baguette tightly in baking parchment and tie securely with string. Take a bread knife with you so you can slice it when you’re ready to eat it."]
'Harissa & lamb sausage rolls', ["600g lamb mince","2 tbsp shop-bought harissa","¼ tsp ground ginger","1⁄2 tsp ground cinnamon","1⁄2 tsp ground cumin","2 tbsp chopped coriander","1 garlic clove , grated","1 preserved lemon , rind finely chopped (discard the flesh)","plain flour , for dusting","325g ready rolled puff pastry","1 large egg , lightly beaten","2 tsp black sesame seeds (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Mix together the lamb, harissa (see our recipe), spices, coriander, garlic, preserved lemon and seasoning in a bowl. Pummel it with your hands to make sure it’s well combined.","STEP 2","Lightly dust your work surface with flour and lay the puff pastry on top. Cut it down the middle lengthways, then roll each piece with a rolling pin so each piece measures about 14 x 42cm.","STEP 3","Divide the lamb mixture into four and roll each one into a sausage shape using your hands. Lay two\xa0of them, end to end, on one of the pieces of pastry. Brush some egg along one of the long sides of the pastry, just by the edge. Pull up the other side to encase the sausage shapes and press the sides together. Do the same with the rest of the meat and pastry.","STEP 4","Cut each pastry parcel into four. Transfer these to a baking sheet, then brush each sausage roll\xa0with the egg and sprinkle over the sesame seeds, if using. Bake for 20-25 mins, or until the pastry is puffed up and golden."]
'Cauliflower steaks with roasted red pepper & olive salsa', ["1 cauliflower","½ tsp smoked paprika","2 tbsp olive oil","1 roasted red pepper","4 black olives, pitted","small handful parsley","1 tsp capers","½ tbsp red wine vinegar","2 tbsp toasted flaked almonds"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 220C/200C fan/gas 7 and line a baking tray with baking parchment. Slice the cauliflower into two 1-inch steaks – use the middle part as it’s larger, and save the rest for another time. Rub the paprika and ½ tbsp oil over the steaks and season. Put on the tray and roast for 15-20 mins until cooked through.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, make the salsa. Chop the pepper, olives, parsley and capers, and put into a bowl and mix with the remaining oil and vinegar. Season to taste. When the steaks are cooked, spoon over the salsa and top with flaked almonds to serve."]
'Triple-layered berry cheesecake', ["100g butter , melted, plus extra for the tin","200g digestive biscuits","2 gelatine leaves","50g raspberries","50g caster sugar , plus 2 tbsp","350g strawberries","500g full-fat soft cheese","250ml double cream","few drops red or pink food colouring","1 tbsp vanilla bean paste","50g white chocolate , melted","few drops lemon extract (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Butter and line the base and sides of a 20cm springform tin. Blitz the digestives in a food processor until you get fine crumbs, or bash in a sandwich bag with a rolling pin. Transfer to a bowl and stir in the melted butter until it looks like damp sand. Tip into the prepared tin, and smooth the mixture with the back of a spoon to make an even base, then chill.","STEP 2","Soak the gelatine leaves in cold water. Put the raspberries in a food processor or in a jug using a stick blender, and blitz to a smooth purée. Sieve out the seeds. Warm the raspberry sauce in a small pan with 1 tbsp sugar until just starting to steam, then pour over 1 drained gelatine\xa0leaf in a bowl and stir to dissolve.","STEP 3","Blitz 3 (about 65g) of the strawberries in a food processor, and warm through with 1 tbsp sugar in the same way. Tip into a bowl and stir in the other drained gelatine leaf.","STEP 4","Whisk the soft cheese, cream and caster sugar until it just starts to thicken. Divide between three bowls (about 260g per bowl). Fold the strawberry purée into one with a few drops of food colouring to make it light pink, the raspberry mix with the gelatine into another with more food colouring so it’s dark pink, and the vanilla bean paste into the third.","STEP 5","Spoon the raspberry filling over the biscuit base, smoothing the surface\xa0so it’s flat. Next, add the strawberry filling, gently smoothing over without disturbing the bottom layer, then repeat with the vanilla mixture, using a clean spoon to level the top. A spatula or knife might help with this to keep from dragging the below layers. Chill for 4 hrs or overnight.","STEP 6","Run a knife around the sides of the cake tin between the cheesecake and the parchment, and loosen the base. Transfer to a cake stand, and smooth the sides, using a palette knife, to neaten the layers. Mix the chocolate with a few drops of lemon extract, if using. Pile the remaining strawberries, some sliced, some whole, on top, and drizzle over the chocolate to finish."]
'Steak & aubergine salad', ["1 aubergine , halved lengthways, cut into thin slices","2 tbsp flour","3 ½ tbsp olive oil","1 sirloin steak","100g lamb’s lettuce","50g feta , cut into cubes","1 green chilli , halved and chopped","½ lemon , juiced","½small pack coriander , plus extra leaves to serve","½small pack mint , plus extra leaves to serve"], ["STEP 1","Dust the aubergine slices in the flour, mixed with some seasoning. Heat 2 tbsp of the olive oil in a large frying pan until shimmering. Add the aubergine to the pan and fry for a few mins on each side until collapsing and soft, then set aside. Turn up the heat, season the steak, then add to the pan and fry for 2 mins on each side for rare (longer if you want it medium). Set aside to rest for 5 mins, then slice.","STEP 2","Blitz the remaining olive oil in a blender or small food processor with the rest of the dressing ingredients and a splash of water. When ready to serve, mix half the dressing with the lamb’s lettuce, then tip onto a plate. Top with the crispy aubergine and steak, crumble over the feta, then drizzle over the remaining dressing. Scatter over the remaining herbs and serve."]
'Vegan vanilla ice cream', ["2 x 400g cans coconut milk (not light)","175g caster sugar","1 tsp sea salt flakes","1 vanilla pod or 1 tbsp vanilla bean paste","2 tbsp cornflour","a pinch turmeric"], ["STEP 1","Pour most of the coconut milk into a saucepan, reserving a splash in a small bowl for later. Add the sugar,\xa0salt and turmeric (for colour) to the pan. Cut the vanilla pod in half lengthways (if using) and scrape the seeds out of both sides with the side of the knife. Put the seeds and the pod, or vanilla paste, into the pan. Warm on a low heat\xa0for 10 mins until the sugar has melted\xa0and the mixture\xa0starts to steam.","STEP 2","Mix the cornflour with the reserved coconut milk in a small bowl until smooth. Pour into the hot milk, and continually whisking, heat for another 5-10 mins until the mixture thickens to a pourable custard consistency. Strain into a bowl, and cover. Leave to cool, then chill for at least 2 hrs.","STEP 3","Pour the chilled mix into an ice cream maker, and churn for 20-30 mins until you get a soft scoop ice cream. Transfer to a sealable container and freeze for up to 3 months until ready to serve. If you don’t have an ice cream maker, pour the chilled mix into a wide-based plastic tub or dish. Freeze for 2-3 hrs, stirring the mix every 20 mins with a fork, to break up any large ice crystals, until soft ice cream. Transfer to a smaller tub and freeze until ready to serve. You should be able to scoop the ice cream easily from the freezer, or leave for a few mins at room temperature to soften, if you need to."]
'Korean chilli, sesame & honey chicken', ["12 chicken thighs , boneless and skinless","2 tbsp soy sauce","1 tbsp sesame oil","thumb-sized piece ginger , grated","4 spring onions , sliced","4 tbsp Korean chilli paste (gochujang) or use a mixture of 3 tbsp ketchup and 1 tbsp sriracha chilli sauce","2 tbsp honey","juice ½ lime","1 tbsp soy sauce","1 tsp sesame oil","2 tbsp sesame seeds"], ["STEP 1","Toss the chicken in the soy sauce, sesame oil and ginger. Thread each thigh on two long metal skewers, so that each skewer pierces one side of the thigh. Keep threading the chicken, making sure it’s packed onto the skewers tightly. Chill until you’re ready to cook. Mix the ingredients for the glaze.","STEP 2","Heat the BBQ. If using a coal BBQ, wait for the coals to turn ashen before you start cooking. Cook the kebab for 5-8 mins on each side (depending on the heat). Once nicely charred but not fully cooked through, start painting on the glaze. The honey will catch if cooked for too long – the key to nice sticky chicken is applying the glaze in layers, turning the kebab often.","STEP 3","Once the glaze has been used up and the chicken is cooked through (it’ll take about 20 mins in total), transfer to a plate and leave to cool for 5 mins before serving scattered with spring onions."]
'Veggie Indian burger', ["2 vegetarian bean burgers","¼ red onion","¼ cucumber","½ large ripe tomato","¼ small bunch  coriander","2 seeded wholemeal  burger buns","2 tbsp raita","2 tbsp mango chutney","20g spicy Bombay mix"], ["STEP 1","Cook the\xa0vegetarian bean burgers following pack instructions. Finely chop the\xa0red onion,\xa0cucumber, tomato and coriander and mix together in a bowl. Lightly toast the burger buns. Divide the raita, burgers, mango chutney, the tomato, onion and cucumber salad and Bombay mix between each bun."]
'Smashed chicken with corn slaw', ["4 skinless chicken breast fillets","1 lime , zested and juiced","2 tbsp bio yogurt","1 tsp fresh thyme leaves","¼ tsp turmeric","2 tbsp finely chopped coriander","1 garlic clove , finely grated","1 tsp rapeseed oil","1 small avocado","1 lime , zested and juiced","2 tbsp bio yogurt","2 tbsp finely chopped coriander","160g corn , cut from 2 cobs","1 red pepper , deseeded and chopped","1 red onion , halved and finely sliced","320g white cabbage , finely sliced","150g new potatoes , boiled, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Cut the chicken breasts in half, then put them between two sheets of baking parchment and bash with a rolling pin to flatten. Mix the lime zest and juice with the yogurt, thyme, turmeric, coriander and garlic in a large bowl. Add the chicken and stir until well coated. Leave to marinate while you make the slaw.","STEP 2","Mash the avocado with the lime juice and zest, 2 tbsp yogurt and the coriander. Stir in the corn, red pepper, onion and cabbage.","STEP 3","Heat a large non-stick frying pan or griddle pan, then cook the chicken in batches for a few mins each side – they’ll cook quickly as they’re thin. Serve the hot chicken with the slaw and the new potatoes. If you\'re cooking for two, chill half\xa0the chicken and slaw for lunch another day (eat within two days)."]
'Easy cornflake tart', ["320g ready-rolled shortcrust pastry","plain flour, to dust","50g butter","125g golden syrup","25g light brown soft sugar","100g cornflakes","125g strawberry or raspberry jam","custard, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Unroll the pastry and briefly\xa0roll out\xa0on a lightly floured work surface\xa0until it\'s large enough\xa0to fit a 23cm loose-bottomed tart tin. Use the rolling pin to lift the pastry over the tin, then press into the corners and sides so the excess pastry hangs over the rim. Trim this away, leaving just a small amount of excess hanging over the rim.","STEP 2","Line the pastry with baking parchment\xa0and fill with baking beans or uncooked rice. Bake for 15 mins. Remove the parchment and beans, then bake for another 5-10 mins until just golden. Remove from the oven and trim any excess pastry from the edges using\xa0a serrated knife.","STEP 3","Heat the butter, syrup and sugar in a small pan with a pinch of salt, stirring frequently, until melted and smooth. Fold in the cornflakes to coat in the butter mixture.","STEP 4","Spoon the jam into the cooked pastry base, then level the surface.\xa0Tip\xa0the cornflake mixture over the jam and gently press down until all of the jam is covered with a layer of the mixture.\xa0Return the tart to the oven and bake\xa0for another 5 mins until the cornflakes are golden and toasted. Leave to cool until just warm\xa0before slicing\xa0and serving with custard."]
'Lemon & yogurt chicken flatbreads', ["2 skinless chicken breasts , cut into strips","1 lemon","1 tsp dried oregano (optional)","1 garlic clove , crushed","pinch of cinnamon","1 tbsp olive oil","4 flatbreads","4 tbsp Greek yogurt","¼ red pepper , finely chopped","1 Little Gem lettuce , finely chopped"], ["STEP 1","Put the chicken in a bowl. Pare strips of zest from the lemon using a vegetable peeler, then juice the lemon too. Add the peel and half the juice to the chicken, along with the oregano (if using), garlic, cinnamon and oil. Mix well, cover and chill for an hour. The lemon juice will start to ‘cook’ the chicken, so don’t leave for longer.","STEP 2","Heat the barbecue. If you are using coals, wait until they turn white. If you are indoors, heat a griddle pan. Thread the chicken strips onto a couple of metal skewers to stop them falling through the grate (you don’t need to do this for the griddle), then grill for a couple of mins each side. The strips will cook through quickly so don’t leave them too long. Season if you like.","STEP 3","Warm the flatbreads on the edge of the barbecue (or on the griddle) for a minute, then transfer them to plates and spread each with ½ tbsp yogurt. Divide the chicken strips between them, then dot on the remaining yogurt and sprinkle over the pepper and lettuce. Fold or roll the flatbreads to eat."]
'Rustic beans & spinach with garlic yogurt', ["2 tbsp rapeseed oil","1 large onion , halved and sliced","170g carrots , cut into small chunks","5 garlic cloves , 3 finely sliced and 2 crushed","1 tbsp sherry vinegar","1 red pepper , deseeded and chopped","½ tsp vegetable bouillon powder , made up to 250ml with boiling water","2 rosemary sprigs","1 tbsp smoked paprika , plus a pinch to serve","150g whole cherry tomatoes","1 ½ tbsp tomato purée","400g and 210g cans butter beans , drained","2 x 120g pots bio yogurt","160g baby spinach","squeeze lemon (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a large pan and fry the onion, carrots and sliced garlic, stirring frequently for 10 mins until the veg starts to caramelise. Pour in the sherry vinegar, allowing it to sizzle in the heat, then add the pepper, bouillon, rosemary, paprika, cherry tomatoes, tomato purée and beans, and cook for 15 mins. Meanwhile, stir the yogurt and crushed garlic together.","STEP 2","Stir the spinach into the pan and cook until wilted, adding a splash of water if you need to. Add some lemon juice to taste if you like, then serve in bowls topped with a dollop of the yogurt, a pinch of paprika and a good grinding of black pepper."]
'Campfire smoky bean brekkie', ["4 tbsp olive or rapeseed oil","3-4 rosemary sprigs","6 chipolatas","12 small cooking chorizo , halved","6 good-quality smoked hot dog sausages , cut into large chunks","2 onions , chopped","500ml carton passata","300g good quality BBQ sauce (we used Stokes)","2 x 400g cans borlotti beans , drained","2 x 400g cans haricot beans , drained","8-10 eggs","toast , to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a large paella pan (ours was 45cm). Add the rosemary and sizzle for a minute or 2, then scoop it out to a plate and set aside. Add the chipolatas and brown all over, push to one side of the pan and add the other sausages. Cook for a few mins until the chorizo starts to release some of its oil, then push these aside too. Add the onions and cook until soft, about 8 mins.","STEP 2","Add the passata, BBQ sauce and some seasoning, bring to a simmer and bubble for a few mins, then stir in the beans and bring everything back to a bubble.","STEP 3","Using the back of a spoon, create little spaces in the beans and crack in the eggs, dotting them over the surface. Cover the pan with foil and cook gently for 10 mins or until the eggs are cooked to your liking. Top with the rosemary and serve with buttered toast and mugs of tea."]
'Coconut chicken noodle salads', ["2 small or 1 large  chicken breast","3 slices ginger","1 stalk lemongrass","400ml coconut milk","150g egg noodles","1-2 tbsp peanut butter","handful green beans , trimmed and cut into lengths","12 cherry tomatoes , halved","2 handfuls baby spinach leaves"], ["STEP 1","Put the chicken, ginger, lemongrass and coconut milk in a pan and bring to a simmer. Add a pinch of salt, then reduce the heat and cook for 10-15 mins until the chicken is cooked through. Cool, then chill until cold.","STEP 2","Cook the noodles following pack instructions. Lift the chicken out of the coconut liquid and shred it, then stir the peanut butter into enough of the liquid to make a thick dressing.","STEP 3","Divide the noodles between four jars or boxes and spoon over the coconut dressing, or take it with you in a separate jar. Add the beans and tomatoes followed by the chicken and spinach. Seal the lid and chill the jars until you need to pack them. Serve in the jar or, for smaller children tip into bowls."]
'Griddled vegetables with melting aubergines', ["1 large aubergine","½a  lemon , zested and juiced","3cloves of garlic , 1 crushed, 2 chopped","2 tbsp chopped parsley , plus extra to serve","1 tsp extra virgin olive oil , plus a little for drizzling","4 tsp omega seed mix (see tip)","2 tsp thyme leaves","1 tbsp rapeseed oil","1 red pepper , deseeded and cut into quarters","1 large onion , thickly sliced","2 courgettes , sliced on the angle","2 large tomatoes , each cut into 3 thick slices","8 Kalamata olives , halved"], ["STEP 1","Grill the aubergine, turning frequently, until soft all over and the skin is blistered, about 8-10 mins. Alternatively, if you have a gas hob, cook it directly over the flame. When it is cool enough to handle, remove the skin, finely chop the flesh and mix with the lemon juice, 1 chopped clove garlic, 1 tbsp parsley, 1 tsp extra virgin olive oil and the seeds. Mix the remaining parsley with the remaining chopped garlic and the lemon zest.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, mix the thyme, crushed garlic and rapeseed oil and toss with the vegetables, keeping the onions as slices rather than breaking up into rings. Heat a large griddle pan and char the vegetables until tender and marked with lines – the tomatoes will need the least time. Pile onto plates with the aubergine purée and olives, drizzle over a little extra olive oil and scatter with the parsley, lemon zest and garlic."]
'Roast side of salmon with chermoula', ["850g side of salmon","3 tbsp olive oil","1 tsp coriander seeds","1 tsp cumin seeds","½ small pack mint , leaves picked","½ small pack coriander","small handful tarragon","1 lemon , zested and juiced","1 fat garlic clove","½ tsp chilli flakes"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Line the bottom of a roasting tin that’s large enough to fit the salmon in with baking parchment. Brush ½ tbsp oil over the skin and season all over. Place skin-side down in the tin and roast for 15-20 mins until the salmon is just cooked through.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, toast the coriander and cumin seeds in a dry frying pan. Tip into a blender and add all the remaining ingredients. Blitz to a smooth green sauce, adding enough water to get a drizzling consistency. Season to taste. The chermoula can be made in the morning and kept chilled in the fridge. Put the salmon on a serving platter and drizzle over a little chermoula, with the rest on the side to serve."]
'Tomato, burrata & broad bean salad', ["500g tomatoes (I used a mix of sizes and colours)","1⁄2 tsp caster sugar","150g broad beans , podded","handful basil","handful chives","handful flat leaf parsley","1 tbsp tarragon","1 tbsp lovage","1 tbsp mint leaves","3 tbsp olive oil","2 tsp Dijon mustard","pinch of fennel seeds","1 lemon , zested","1 tbsp red wine vinegar","2 x 100g burrata or 2 x 125g balls mozzarella","50g hazelnuts , toasted and roughly chopped"], ["STEP 1","Chop the tomatoes into a mixture of slices and wedges, then put them in a bowl. Toss with 1/2 tsp salt and the sugar, then leave to marinate for 30 mins. Meanwhile, bring a pan of water to the boil and add the broad beans. Boil for 2 mins, then drain and allow to cool for a couple of mins. Peel them out of their shells. This is a bit fiddly but well worth it – I use my thumbnail to pierce the skin, then gently squeeze out the shiny green beans.","STEP 2","Finely chop the herbs, then tip into a bowl and whisk in the olive oil, mustard, fennel seeds, most of the lemon zest, and red wine vinegar. Season, then stir in the broad beans.","STEP 3","Tip the tomatoes onto a serving platter. Top with the burrata, then spoon over the broad bean salsa. Scatter over the hazelnuts and remaining lemon zest to serve."]
'Roasted asparagus & pea salad', ["3 tbsp natural yogurt","1 tsp wholegrain mustard","½ tsp honey","½ lemon , zested and juiced","100g watercress","1 large slice sourdough bread","200g asparagus , tough ends removed","1 ½ tbsp cold-pressed rapeseed oil","2 eggs","200g frozen peas"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 220C/200C fan/gas 7. Mix the yogurt, mustard and honey together. Add the lemon zest, then add the juice and some seasoning to taste. Squeeze any remaining lemon juice over the watercress.","STEP 2","Tear the bread into rough chunks and put them on a large roasting tray with the asparagus. Toss both in the rapeseed oil and seasoning, and roast for 10 mins until the asparagus is tender and croutons are golden.","STEP 3","Meanwhile, cook the eggs in a pan of boiling water for 6 mins, then add the frozen peas and cook for 1 min more. Drain and rinse both under cold water until cool. Peel the eggs, then cut into quarters.","STEP 4","To assemble, mix the asparagus and peas through the watercress, then toss through the creamy dressing. Nestle in the eggs and croutons, and serve."]
'Mix & match seafood tacos', ["8 crispy corn taco shells","2 sushi-grade skinless salmon fillets (about 250g), cut into 1cm cubes (ask your fishmonger)","2 tbsp soy sauce","2 tbsp Yuzu juice or lime juice","1 tsp sesame oil","1 avocado , stoned, peeled and cubed","nori seaweed , sliced, to serve","1 tsp olive oil","1 crushed garlic","1 tsp crushed ginger","3 spring onions , sliced, plus extra to serve","1⁄2 tsp finely chopped red chilli","250g raw king prawns , roughly chopped","1 lime , zested and juiced, plus wedges to serve","1⁄2 small bunch coriander , leaves picked"], ["STEP 1","For the salmon, combine all the ingredients, except the avocado and seaweed, in a bowl and mix well. Cover and leave to marinate in the fridge while you prepare the other ingredients.","STEP 2","For the prawns, heat the olive oil in a pan over a high heat. Add the garlic, ginger, spring onions and chilli, stirring into the oil for 20 secs. Add the prawns and stir constantly until cooked through and pink. Remove from the heat and stir through the lime zest and juice.","STEP 3","Stir the avocado into the salmon and warm the taco shells following pack instructions. Fill each taco with the prawns or the salmon. Top the salmon tacos with the seaweed and the prawn tacos with coriander and extra spring onions. Squeeze over lime wedges to serve."]
'Pea mousse', ["120ml double cream","120ml milk","3 ⅓ sheets gelatine (the sheets are easy to snap into thirds)","5 egg yolks (freeze the whites for meringues)","15g golden caster sugar","pinch salt","200g white chocolate , chopped","60g butter , chopped","200g frozen petits pois , defrosted","pea shoots and edible flowers, to decorate"], ["STEP 1","Put the cream and milk in a pan and heat slowly until almost boiling. Soak the gelatine in cold water until floppy.","STEP 2","Put the egg yolks in a bowl with the sugar and whisk together with the salt. Pour the milk mixture over the yolks, then pour the lot back into the pan (give it a wipe first to clean the bottom) and stir the mixture over a low heat until it starts to thicken and make a thin custard. Keep stirring and don’t turn the heat up too high or the eggs might start to cook into clumps.","STEP 3","Turn off the heat and stir in the gelatine, chocolate and butter then, once incorporated, stir in the peas. Whizz in a blender until it is as fine as you can get it, then pour it through a sieve into a jug. Either chill in a box or divide the mixture between glasses and chill them. If you’ve chilled the mixture in a box, spoon or pipe it into glasses to serve and decorate with pea shoots and flowers."]
'Sweetcorn fritters with eggs & black bean salsa', ["1 tsp rapeseed oil","1 small red onion (85g), finely chopped","1 red pepper , deseeded and finely diced","100g wholemeal self-raising flour","1 tsp smoked paprika","1 tsp ground coriander","1 tsp baking powder","325g can sweetcorn , drained","6 large eggs","1 small red onion (85g), finely chopped","4 tomatoes (320g), chopped","2 x 400g cans black beans , drained","1 lime , zested and juiced","½ x 30g pack coriander , chopped"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6 and line a large baking tray with baking parchment.","STEP 2","Heat the oil in a small pan and fry the onion and pepper for 5 mins until softened. Meanwhile, mix the flour, spices and baking powder in a bowl. Add the onions, pepper, corn and 2 of the eggs, then mix together well.","STEP 3","Spoon eight mounds of the mixture onto the baking tray, well spaced apart, then flatten slightly with the back of the spoon. Bake for 20 mins until set and golden.","STEP 4","Meanwhile, mix together the salsa ingredients and poach 2 of the remaining eggs to your liking. If you\'re following our Healthy Diet Plan, serve four fritters on the day you make them, topped with half the salsa and the poached eggs. Chill the remaining fritters for another day. Reheat them in a pan or microwave and serve with 2 more poached eggs and the remaining salsa."]
'Stuffed rainbow baguette', ["1 artisan-style baguette","4 tbsp hummus","8 slices medium  cheddar","¼ red pepper , thinly sliced","¼ cooked beetroot , shredded","2 radishes , thinly sliced","1 yellow or orange carrot , shredded or grated","handful green leaves","1 tbsp vegetarian pesto , mixed with 1 tbsp olive oil"], ["STEP 1","Cut the baguette in half so you can open it out like a book. Spread the hummus over the bottom half of the baguette and add the cheese, breaking the slices up if you need to. Scatter the pepper, beetroot, radish and carrot along the baguette, then add the leaves, dribble with the pesto and close the baguette.","STEP 2","Wrap the baguette tightly in baking parchment and tie securely with string. Take a bread knife with you so you can slice it when you’re ready to eat it."]
'Slow-roasted courgettes with fennel & orzo', ["pinch of saffron","1⁄2 bulb of fennel , sliced","100g cherry tomatoes , halved","1 bay leaf","2 tbsp olive oil","pinch of dried chilli flakes","120ml dry white wine","4-6 baby to medium-sized courgettes","1 lemon , zested","50g sourdough breadcrumbs","200g orzo","1 tbsp pine nuts , toasted","1 tbsp ricotta","handful of dill"], ["STEP 1","Put the saffron in a small bowl and cover with 1/2 tbsp of boiling water. Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Put the fennel in a roasting tin with the tomatoes and bay leaf, drizzle over some oil, season and toss together with the chilli flakes. Pour over the wine. Prick the courgettes all over with a fork and place on top of the fennel. Drizzle with a little more oil, then season and cover with foil.","STEP 2","Roast for 1 1/2 - 2 hrs, turning the courgettes halfway through, removing the foil for the last 5 mins. The courgettes should be very soft. Lift the courgettes from the pan and set aside.","STEP 3","Meanwhile, heat 1 tbsp olive oil in a frying pan over a medium heat. Add half the lemon zest and breadcrumbs, and gently fry until the bread is golden and crunchy. Set aside.","STEP 4","Cook the orzo in a pan of boiling water until al dente, then drain. Toss with the fennel, tomatoes, pine nuts, the saffron and its water. Season.","STEP 5","Divide the orzo between plates and add half the ricotta to each, drizzle with olive oil and sprinkle with sea salt. Top with the courgettes and scatter over the breadcrumbs, remaining lemon zest and sprigs of dill."]
'Chipotle gazpacho', ["1kg ripe tomatoes , roughly chopped","1 large red pepper , deseeded and roughly chopped","½ cucumber , sliced","4 spring onions , finely sliced","1 small garlic clove , grated","40g blanched almonds , roughly chopped","3 limes , juiced","2 tbsp olive oil","2 tsp chipotle paste","1 large, ripe avocado , cubed","1 small red chilli , deseeded and finely chopped","½ small bunch coriander , finely chopped"], ["STEP 1","Put the tomatoes, pepper, cucumber, two of the spring onions, the garlic, half the almonds, half\xa0the lime juice, and all the olive oil and chipotle paste into a blender. Whizz until almost smooth. Pour into a jug and chill for at least 2 hrs.","STEP 2","When ready to eat, toss the remaining spring onion, avocado, chilli and coriander with the remaining lime juice. Ladle the soup into four bowls and top with the avocado salsa and reserved almonds."]
'Smashed cannellini bean tartine', ["400g can cannellini beans , drained and rinsed","2 tbsp rapeseed oil","1 large lemon , zested and juiced","1 small garlic clove , finely grated","1 small red chilli , deseeded and finely chopped","1⁄2 small bunch parsley , finely chopped","8 cherry tomatoes , halved","2 slices sourdough","15g feta , crumbled","50g rocket"], ["STEP 1","Put the beans, 1 tbsp of the oil, the lemon zest and juice and the garlic in a food processor and blitz to create a chunky texture. Transfer to a bowl and stir through the chilli, parsley and cherry tomatoes.","STEP 2","Lightly toast the bread and pile on the cannellini bean smash, scatter over the feta and drizzle with the remaining oil. Serve with the rocket on the side."]
'Crab & avocado tostadas', ["1 small  red onion , sliced into thin rings","juice 2  limes , plus wedges to serve","pinch of  caster sugar","170g can white crabmeat in brine, drained","2 spring onions , finely sliced","1 red chilli , deseeded and chopped","1 really ripe avocado , peeled, stoned and chopped","1 small garlic clove , crushed","2 corn tortillas","handful mixed salad leaves"], ["STEP 1","Put the onion in a bowl and cover with half the lime juice and a good pinch each of sugar and salt. Leave to soften while you get everything else ready.","STEP 2","Mix together the crabmeat, spring onions and half the chilli. Season with black pepper and set aside. Mash the avocado with the remaining lime juice, garlic and some seasoning. You can leave it quite chunky or mash it until smooth. Stir in the rest of the chilli.","STEP 3","Bend each tortilla in half and toast in a toaster for 1 min. Put on 2 plates and top with the salad leaves, then mashed avocado. Finish with the crabmeat and drained pickled onion. Serve with lime wedges for squeezing over."]
'Smashed cannellini bean tartine', ["400g can cannellini beans , drained and rinsed","2 tbsp rapeseed oil","1 large lemon , zested and juiced","1 small garlic clove , finely grated","1 small red chilli , deseeded and finely chopped","1⁄2 small bunch parsley , finely chopped","8 cherry tomatoes , halved","2 slices sourdough","15g feta , crumbled","50g rocket"], ["STEP 1","Put the beans, 1 tbsp of the oil, the lemon zest and juice and the garlic in a food processor and blitz to create a chunky texture. Transfer to a bowl and stir through the chilli, parsley and cherry tomatoes.","STEP 2","Lightly toast the bread and pile on the cannellini bean smash, scatter over the feta and drizzle with the remaining oil. Serve with the rocket on the side."]
'Roasted vegetables', ["3 tbsp olive oil","1 aubergine, cut into chunks","2 mixed coloured peppers, such as orange and red, cut into chunks","1 red onion, cut into wedges","2 courgettes, cut into chunks","4 garlic cloves, smashed","3 sprigs of thyme","200g cherry tomatoes","handful of basil leaves","zest of 1 lemon","50g feta, crumbled"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 200C/180C Fan/gas 6. Mix the oil with the aubergine, peppers, red onion, courgette, garlic and thyme in a bowl with sea salt and black pepper. Tip into a large roasting tin then roast for 30 mins. Add the tomatoes to the pan and return to the oven for 10 mins.","STEP 2","Squeeze the garlic from their skins, remove the thyme then scatter over the basil, lemon zest and crumbled feta."]
'Grilled steak salad with horseradish dressing', ["250g/9oz bavette or skirt steak","1 tsp celery seeds, crushed","1 tbsp Worcestershire sauce","little olive oil , for brushing","6 celery sticks, thinly sliced, leaves reserved","200g mixed tomato , sliced or halved (beefsteak, plum and red and yellow cherry are all good)","1 tbsp Worcestershire sauce","1 tbsp olive oil","1 tsp horseradish sauce","1 tsp red wine vinegar","1 tsp tomato purée"], ["STEP 1","Rub the steak on both sides with the crushed celery seeds, some seasoning and the Worcestershire sauce. Brush with olive oil and leave to marinate while you prepare the salad.","STEP 2","Mix the dressing ingredients in a small bowl. Divide the celery and tomatoes between 2 plates. Heat a griddle pan over a high heat, then cook the meat for 2-3 mins on each side (depending on how thick your steaks are). Remove from the heat and leave to rest, covered with foil, for 5 mins.","STEP 3","Slice the steaks and place on top of the salads, pour the dressing over and scatter over the celery leaves."]
'Bean, feta & herb dip', ["400g can cannellini bean","200g feta cheese","1 tbsp lemon juice","1 garlic clove , crushed","3 tbsp chopped dill, mint or  chives (or 1 tbsp each)"], ["STEP 1","Drain and rinse beans. Tip into a food processor with feta, lemon juice and garlic, and whizz until smooth. Add dill, mint or chives, and season with pepper."]
'Summer egg salad with basil & peas', ["150g new potatoes , thickly sliced","160g French beans , trimmed","160g frozen peas","3 eggs","160g romaine lettuce , roughly torn into pieces","1 tbsp extra virgin olive oil","2 tsp cider vinegar","½ tsp English mustard powder","2 tbsp chopped mint","3 tbsp chopped basil","1 garlic clove , finely grated","1 tbsp capers"], ["STEP 1","Cook the potatoes in a pan of simmering water for 5 mins. Add the beans and cook 5 mins more, then tip in the peas and cook for 2 mins until all the vegetables are just tender. Meanwhile, boil the eggs in another pan for 8 mins. Drain and run under cold water, then carefully shell and halve.","STEP 2","Mix all the dressing ingredients together in a large bowl with a good grinding of black pepper, crushing the herbs and capers with the back of a spoon to intensify their flavours.","STEP 3","Mix the warm vegetables into the dressing to coat, then add the lettuce and toss everything together. Pile onto plates, top with the eggs and grind over some black pepper to serve."]
'Peach & orange yogurt pots with ginger oats', ["4 peaches or nectarines, stoned and diced","1 orange , juiced and zested","120g porridge oats","25g pine nuts","½ tsp ground ginger","1 tsp ground cinnamon","2 tbsp sultanas","4 x 150ml pots bio yogurt"], ["STEP 1","Put the peaches and orange juice in a small pan. Put the lid on and cook gently for 3-5 mins, depending on their ripeness, until softened. Set aside to cool.","STEP 2","Tip the oats and pine nuts into a pan and heat gently, stirring frequently until they’re just starting to toast. Turn off the heat and add the spices, zest and sultanas.","STEP 3","Spoon the peaches and juices into four tumblers and top with the yogurt. Cover and chill until needed. Keep the oat mixture in an airtight container. When ready to serve, top the peaches and yogurt with the oat mixture."]
'Griddled vegetables with melting aubergines', ["1 large aubergine","½a  lemon , zested and juiced","3cloves of garlic , 1 crushed, 2 chopped","2 tbsp chopped parsley , plus extra to serve","1 tsp extra virgin olive oil , plus a little for drizzling","4 tsp omega seed mix (see tip)","2 tsp thyme leaves","1 tbsp rapeseed oil","1 red pepper , deseeded and cut into quarters","1 large onion , thickly sliced","2 courgettes , sliced on the angle","2 large tomatoes , each cut into 3 thick slices","8 Kalamata olives , halved"], ["STEP 1","Grill the aubergine, turning frequently, until soft all over and the skin is blistered, about 8-10 mins. Alternatively, if you have a gas hob, cook it directly over the flame. When it is cool enough to handle, remove the skin, finely chop the flesh and mix with the lemon juice, 1 chopped clove garlic, 1 tbsp parsley, 1 tsp extra virgin olive oil and the seeds. Mix the remaining parsley with the remaining chopped garlic and the lemon zest.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, mix the thyme, crushed garlic and rapeseed oil and toss with the vegetables, keeping the onions as slices rather than breaking up into rings. Heat a large griddle pan and char the vegetables until tender and marked with lines – the tomatoes will need the least time. Pile onto plates with the aubergine purée and olives, drizzle over a little extra olive oil and scatter with the parsley, lemon zest and garlic."]
'Lamb kebab burger', ["2 tbsp fat-free yogurt","1 tbsp mayonnaise","1 small  garlic clove , grated","½ tbsp vegetable oil","2 lamb burgers","2 sesame seed burger buns","1 tomato , sliced","20g gherkins , sliced","1 red chilli , finely sliced","leaves of 1 Baby Gem lettuce"], ["STEP 1","Combine the yogurt with the mayonnaise and grated garlic\xa0in\xa0a small bowl. Heat the\xa0vegetable oil in a non-stick frying pan over a medium heat, add the lamb burgers and fry for around 10 mins, turning over halfway through, until piping hot in the centre. Lightly toast the burger buns. Divide the\xa0sliced tomato,\xa0sliced gherkins, the burgers, some garlic sauce, chilli and the lettuce leaves\xa0between each burger bun, then enjoy immediately."]
'Crab & avocado tostadas', ["1 small  red onion , sliced into thin rings","juice 2  limes , plus wedges to serve","pinch of  caster sugar","170g can white crabmeat in brine, drained","2 spring onions , finely sliced","1 red chilli , deseeded and chopped","1 really ripe avocado , peeled, stoned and chopped","1 small garlic clove , crushed","2 corn tortillas","handful mixed salad leaves"], ["STEP 1","Put the onion in a bowl and cover with half the lime juice and a good pinch each of sugar and salt. Leave to soften while you get everything else ready.","STEP 2","Mix together the crabmeat, spring onions and half the chilli. Season with black pepper and set aside. Mash the avocado with the remaining lime juice, garlic and some seasoning. You can leave it quite chunky or mash it until smooth. Stir in the rest of the chilli.","STEP 3","Bend each tortilla in half and toast in a toaster for 1 min. Put on 2 plates and top with the salad leaves, then mashed avocado. Finish with the crabmeat and drained pickled onion. Serve with lime wedges for squeezing over."]
'Korean chilli, sesame & honey chicken', ["12 chicken thighs , boneless and skinless","2 tbsp soy sauce","1 tbsp sesame oil","thumb-sized piece ginger , grated","4 spring onions , sliced","4 tbsp Korean chilli paste (gochujang) or use a mixture of 3 tbsp ketchup and 1 tbsp sriracha chilli sauce","2 tbsp honey","juice ½ lime","1 tbsp soy sauce","1 tsp sesame oil","2 tbsp sesame seeds"], ["STEP 1","Toss the chicken in the soy sauce, sesame oil and ginger. Thread each thigh on two long metal skewers, so that each skewer pierces one side of the thigh. Keep threading the chicken, making sure it’s packed onto the skewers tightly. Chill until you’re ready to cook. Mix the ingredients for the glaze.","STEP 2","Heat the BBQ. If using a coal BBQ, wait for the coals to turn ashen before you start cooking. Cook the kebab for 5-8 mins on each side (depending on the heat). Once nicely charred but not fully cooked through, start painting on the glaze. The honey will catch if cooked for too long – the key to nice sticky chicken is applying the glaze in layers, turning the kebab often.","STEP 3","Once the glaze has been used up and the chicken is cooked through (it’ll take about 20 mins in total), transfer to a plate and leave to cool for 5 mins before serving scattered with spring onions."]
'Pea mousse', ["120ml double cream","120ml milk","3 ⅓ sheets gelatine (the sheets are easy to snap into thirds)","5 egg yolks (freeze the whites for meringues)","15g golden caster sugar","pinch salt","200g white chocolate , chopped","60g butter , chopped","200g frozen petits pois , defrosted","pea shoots and edible flowers, to decorate"], ["STEP 1","Put the cream and milk in a pan and heat slowly until almost boiling. Soak the gelatine in cold water until floppy.","STEP 2","Put the egg yolks in a bowl with the sugar and whisk together with the salt. Pour the milk mixture over the yolks, then pour the lot back into the pan (give it a wipe first to clean the bottom) and stir the mixture over a low heat until it starts to thicken and make a thin custard. Keep stirring and don’t turn the heat up too high or the eggs might start to cook into clumps.","STEP 3","Turn off the heat and stir in the gelatine, chocolate and butter then, once incorporated, stir in the peas. Whizz in a blender until it is as fine as you can get it, then pour it through a sieve into a jug. Either chill in a box or divide the mixture between glasses and chill them. If you’ve chilled the mixture in a box, spoon or pipe it into glasses to serve and decorate with pea shoots and flowers."]
'BBQ chorizo potato salad', ["750g new potatoes , halved if large","4-6 large cooking  chorizo (or 12 small ones)","150ml soured cream","3 tbsp mayonnaise","1 tsp Dijon mustard","1 celery stalk , finely diced (optional)","1 tbsp dill , very finely chopped"], ["STEP 1","Put the potatoes in a pan of cold salted water and bring to the boil. Simmer for 15 mins or until tender and a knife goes in easily. Drain the potatoes and return to the pan, then stand for 5-10 mins to steam-dry. Cut them into bite-sized pieces, season with salt, cover and chill until cold.","STEP 2","Heat the barbecue (or heat a griddle pan if cooking indoors). Halve each large chorizo lengthways and put them, cut-side down, on the barbecue (small chorizo can go on whole). Cook, turning once or twice, until they are crisp around the edges and cooked through. Slice the chorizo into pieces.","STEP 3","Combine the soured cream, mayonnaise and mustard, then add to the cold potatoes with the celery and dill. Gently fold the potatoes into the dressing, taking care not to break up them too much. Scatter the chorizo on top to serve."]
'Strawberry & elderflower gateau', ["2 x 200g sponge flan cases (25cm)","6 tbsp strawberry jam or conserve","400g strawberries (look for ones that are a similar size), halved","600ml double cream","2 tbsp icing sugar , plus 150g","5 tbsp elderflower cordial","5-6 raspberries or some pink food colouring gel","small handful pistachios (optional), slivered or roughly chopped (see tip)","strawberry coulis or cream, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Remove the base of a 20cm loose-bottomed cake tin (make sure it’s a deep one) and use it as a template to cut out a circle from each flan case. Chop the offcuts from the flans into small pieces and set aside. Reassemble the tin and line it with a couple of sheets of cling film, leaving enough overhanging to wrap up once the tin is filled.","STEP 2","Put one flan disc in the base of the tin and spread over half the jam. Arrange the strawberries around the outside with the cut surface facing outwards. If you have any particularly large or small strawberries, put them to one side.","STEP 3","Whip the cream, 2 tbsp icing sugar and 3 tbsp elderflower cordial together in a bowl until the mixture holds its shape. Chop the reserved strawberries, then fold them into the cream mixture. Use half of the cream to fill the centre of the gateau, spreading right to the edges so it holds the strawberries in place.","STEP 4","Push a single layer of the chopped flan offcuts into the cream (you may have some leftovers to nibble on), and drizzle over the remaining elderflower cordial. Stir the remaining jam through the rest of the cream, spread it over the flan pieces, and top with the final piece of flan. Fold over the cling film and give the gateau a gentle press down to compact the layers. Chill while you make the icing. Can be chilled for up to 24 hrs.","STEP 5","Crush the raspberries with the back of a fork and stir in the 150g icing sugar to make a thick icing. Add a splash of water if it’s too thick. Alternatively, add enough water to the icing sugar to make a thick icing, then stir in a few drops of pink food colouring.","STEP 6","When you’re ready to serve, remove the cake from the tin and discard the cling film, then transfer to a cake stand. Spread the icing right to the edges, then scatter the pistachios in a ring around the top, if using, and serve with a little strawberry coulis or cream on the side, if you like."]
'Summer fruit & mascarpone tart', ["2 x 320g ready-rolled all-butter puff pastry","100g icing sugar","750g tub mascarpone","600ml double cream","2 tsp vanilla extract","200g raspberries , a few halved","200g blackberries , a few halved","1 large mango , peeled and thinly sliced","6 nectarines or peaches, or a mixture, sliced","4 passion fruits (look for ones with crinkly skin, this means they’re ripe), halved, seeds and pulp scooped out","handful small mint leaves"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Unroll 1 pastry sheet, but leave it on the parchment. Place it on a baking tray, dust with 2 tbsp icing sugar, then cover with another sheet of parchment and another baking tray. Pour baking beans into the tray to weigh it down, or use empty cans. Bake for 30 mins, then check if the pastry is golden all over. If not, return for another 5 mins or so. Repeat with the other pastry sheet (or cook both together if you have enough trays). Once out of the oven, trim the edges with a large, sharp knife. Leave to cool.","STEP 2","Softly whip the mascarpone, cream, vanilla and remaining icing sugar, then transfer half to a disposable piping bag fitted with a 1.5cm round nozzle (or just snip off the corner). Pipe blobs of the mascarpone cream over the surface of one piece of pastry, right up to the edges. Top with half the fruit and dust with a little icing sugar.","STEP 3","Top with the second piece of pastry, more mascarpone cream (refilling the bag when you need to), the remaining fruit, a dusting of icing sugar and, finally, some mint leaves. Use a serrated knife to cut through the layers without squashing the whole tart. Best served within an hour or two, but leftovers will keep for up to two days in the fridge."]
'Strawberry shortbread ice cream sandwich', ["4 scoops strawberry cheesecake ice cream , softened","a few fresh strawberries , finely chopped","8 Viennese whirls (or shortbread biscuits)"], ["STEP 1","Mix the ice cream with the strawberries and freeze until solid.","STEP 2","Sandwich spoonfuls of the ice cream between the biscuits, then eat immediately."]
'Coconut chicken noodle salads', ["2 small or 1 large  chicken breast","3 slices ginger","1 stalk lemongrass","400ml coconut milk","150g egg noodles","1-2 tbsp peanut butter","handful green beans , trimmed and cut into lengths","12 cherry tomatoes , halved","2 handfuls baby spinach leaves"], ["STEP 1","Put the chicken, ginger, lemongrass and coconut milk in a pan and bring to a simmer. Add a pinch of salt, then reduce the heat and cook for 10-15 mins until the chicken is cooked through. Cool, then chill until cold.","STEP 2","Cook the noodles following pack instructions. Lift the chicken out of the coconut liquid and shred it, then stir the peanut butter into enough of the liquid to make a thick dressing.","STEP 3","Divide the noodles between four jars or boxes and spoon over the coconut dressing, or take it with you in a separate jar. Add the beans and tomatoes followed by the chicken and spinach. Seal the lid and chill the jars until you need to pack them. Serve in the jar or, for smaller children tip into bowls."]
'Slow-roasted courgettes with fennel & orzo', ["pinch of saffron","1⁄2 bulb of fennel , sliced","100g cherry tomatoes , halved","1 bay leaf","2 tbsp olive oil","pinch of dried chilli flakes","120ml dry white wine","4-6 baby to medium-sized courgettes","1 lemon , zested","50g sourdough breadcrumbs","200g orzo","1 tbsp pine nuts , toasted","1 tbsp ricotta","handful of dill"], ["STEP 1","Put the saffron in a small bowl and cover with 1/2 tbsp of boiling water. Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Put the fennel in a roasting tin with the tomatoes and bay leaf, drizzle over some oil, season and toss together with the chilli flakes. Pour over the wine. Prick the courgettes all over with a fork and place on top of the fennel. Drizzle with a little more oil, then season and cover with foil.","STEP 2","Roast for 1 1/2 - 2 hrs, turning the courgettes halfway through, removing the foil for the last 5 mins. The courgettes should be very soft. Lift the courgettes from the pan and set aside.","STEP 3","Meanwhile, heat 1 tbsp olive oil in a frying pan over a medium heat. Add half the lemon zest and breadcrumbs, and gently fry until the bread is golden and crunchy. Set aside.","STEP 4","Cook the orzo in a pan of boiling water until al dente, then drain. Toss with the fennel, tomatoes, pine nuts, the saffron and its water. Season.","STEP 5","Divide the orzo between plates and add half the ricotta to each, drizzle with olive oil and sprinkle with sea salt. Top with the courgettes and scatter over the breadcrumbs, remaining lemon zest and sprigs of dill."]
'Charred nectarine & prosciutto panzanella', ["3 slices sourdough","4 tbsp olive oil","1 tbsp thyme leaves","1 tbsp capers","1⁄2 lemon , juiced","2 tsp Dijon mustard","4-6 ripe nectarines , halved and stoned","bunch of basil","50g sorrel or spinach leaves","handful of chervil","handful of tarragon","2 tbsp ricotta","100g prosciutto","handful of roasted hazelnuts , chopped"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Brush the bread with 1 tbsp of the olive oil and scatter over some sea salt and thyme leaves. Roast for 15 mins, turning once, until crispy and golden. Break up into a bowl and toss with the capers.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, whisk together the lemon juice, 2 tbsp olive oil, a pinch of salt and the mustard to make a dressing, then pour half over the bread.","STEP 3","Heat a grill pan to a high heat and sprinkle in some sea salt. Drizzle the nectarines with the remaining 1 tbsp oil and grill, flesh-side down, until charred. Add to the bowl with the bread, along with the basil, sorrel, chervil and tarragon.","STEP 4","Season and toss everything together, then pile onto a serving platter. Top with the ricotta, prosciutto and hazelnuts, and serve with the remaining dressing on the side, if you like."]
'Pea mousse', ["120ml double cream","120ml milk","3 ⅓ sheets gelatine (the sheets are easy to snap into thirds)","5 egg yolks (freeze the whites for meringues)","15g golden caster sugar","pinch salt","200g white chocolate , chopped","60g butter , chopped","200g frozen petits pois , defrosted","pea shoots and edible flowers, to decorate"], ["STEP 1","Put the cream and milk in a pan and heat slowly until almost boiling. Soak the gelatine in cold water until floppy.","STEP 2","Put the egg yolks in a bowl with the sugar and whisk together with the salt. Pour the milk mixture over the yolks, then pour the lot back into the pan (give it a wipe first to clean the bottom) and stir the mixture over a low heat until it starts to thicken and make a thin custard. Keep stirring and don’t turn the heat up too high or the eggs might start to cook into clumps.","STEP 3","Turn off the heat and stir in the gelatine, chocolate and butter then, once incorporated, stir in the peas. Whizz in a blender until it is as fine as you can get it, then pour it through a sieve into a jug. Either chill in a box or divide the mixture between glasses and chill them. If you’ve chilled the mixture in a box, spoon or pipe it into glasses to serve and decorate with pea shoots and flowers."]
'Mashed cannellini beans with wilted greens & fried artichokes', ["4 tbsp olive oil","1 garlic clove , crushed","2 thyme sprigs","pinch of red chilli flakes","400g can cannellini beans , drained, 1 tbsp of can water reserved","1 lemon , zested and juiced, plus wedges to serve","200g mixed seasonal greens (I used spinach, watercress, sorrel and rocket)","2 tbsp semolina flour","100g cooked artichoke hearts , in oil","few rosemary sprigs , finely chopped (optional)","parmesan or vegetarian alternative, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Warm 1 tbsp olive oil in a saucepan over a medium heat. Add the garlic, thyme, a pinch of salt and the chilli flakes, and cook for 1 min or so. Tip in the beans, then add a slosh of their water and the juice of 1/2 a lemon. Cook for a few mins, crushing them with a fork or the back of a wooden spoon. Remove from the heat and discard the springs of thyme. Keep warm.","STEP 2","Heat a little olive oil in a non-stick frying pan with a lid. Add the greens and a pinch of salt, then put the lid on to wilt and steam the greens for a few mins until softened. Season and add some of the lemon juice, and tip into a bowl. Keep warm.","STEP 3","Heat 2 tbsp olive oil in the frying pan you used for the greens. Put the semolina flour in a bowl and season. Drain the artichokes and pat them dry with kitchen paper. Dip each one in the flour and put in the pan to shallow fry, turning halfway through, until crisp and golden, around 3-5 mins. Spoon the cannellini beans onto a plate and top with the wilted greens and artichokes. Garnish with lemon zest, rosemary, grated parmesan and extra lemon wedges on the side."]
'Mint & basil griddled peach salad', ["1 lime , zested and juiced","1 tbsp rapeseed oil","2 tbsp finely chopped mint , plus a few whole leaves to serve","2 tbsp basil , chopped","2 peaches (300g), quartered","75g quinoa","160g fine beans , trimmed and halved","1 small red onion , very finely chopped","1 large Little Gem lettuce (165g), roughly chopped","½ x 60g pack rocket","1 small avocado , stoned and sliced"], ["STEP 1","Mix the lime zest and juice, oil, mint and basil, then put half in a bowl with the peaches. Meanwhile, cook the quinoa following pack instructions.","STEP 2","Cook the beans for 3-4 mins until just tender. Meanwhile, griddle the peaches for 1 min on each side. If you don’t have a griddle pan, use a large non-stick frying pan with a drop of oil.","STEP 3","Drain the quinoa and divide between shallow bowls. Toss the warm beans and onion in the remaining mint mixture and pile on top of the quinoa with the lettuce and rocket. Top with the avocado and peaches and scatter over the mint leaves. Serve while still warm."]
'Summer fruit & mascarpone tart', ["2 x 320g ready-rolled all-butter puff pastry","100g icing sugar","750g tub mascarpone","600ml double cream","2 tsp vanilla extract","200g raspberries , a few halved","200g blackberries , a few halved","1 large mango , peeled and thinly sliced","6 nectarines or peaches, or a mixture, sliced","4 passion fruits (look for ones with crinkly skin, this means they’re ripe), halved, seeds and pulp scooped out","handful small mint leaves"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Unroll 1 pastry sheet, but leave it on the parchment. Place it on a baking tray, dust with 2 tbsp icing sugar, then cover with another sheet of parchment and another baking tray. Pour baking beans into the tray to weigh it down, or use empty cans. Bake for 30 mins, then check if the pastry is golden all over. If not, return for another 5 mins or so. Repeat with the other pastry sheet (or cook both together if you have enough trays). Once out of the oven, trim the edges with a large, sharp knife. Leave to cool.","STEP 2","Softly whip the mascarpone, cream, vanilla and remaining icing sugar, then transfer half to a disposable piping bag fitted with a 1.5cm round nozzle (or just snip off the corner). Pipe blobs of the mascarpone cream over the surface of one piece of pastry, right up to the edges. Top with half the fruit and dust with a little icing sugar.","STEP 3","Top with the second piece of pastry, more mascarpone cream (refilling the bag when you need to), the remaining fruit, a dusting of icing sugar and, finally, some mint leaves. Use a serrated knife to cut through the layers without squashing the whole tart. Best served within an hour or two, but leftovers will keep for up to two days in the fridge."]
'Griddled halloumi with watermelon & caper breadcrumbs', ["750g watermelon","2 small shallots , very finely sliced","100ml extra virgin olive oil , plus extra for brushing and to serve","4 tsp white balsamic vinegar","300g halloumi , sliced","good squeeze of lemon juice","75g slightly stale country bread , crusts removed, blitzed into coarse breadcrumbs","1-2 cloves garlic , finely chopped","½ medium red chilli , halved, deseeded and chopped","2½ tbsp capers , rinsed","50g blanched almonds , toasted and chopped","small bunch of mint , leaves picked, half of them torn"], ["STEP 1","Cut the watermelon into either cubes or slices and transfer to a bowl with the shallots. Add 4 tbsp extra virgin olive oil and the balsamic, then season with fresh black pepper. Cover and put in the fridge for about 15-20 mins.","STEP 2","Heat the remaining oil in a frying pan. Fry the breadcrumbs until turning gold. Add the garlic, chilli and capers and cook for another minute, then toss in the almonds. Remove from the heat, add the torn mint (it will wilt a little), then taste – it will be quite salty, but the watermelon won’t be, so you’ll get a good contrast.","STEP 3","Brush the halloumi with a little oil and heat a griddle pan. Griddle the cheese on both sides until just starting to melt but still holding its shape, with nice golden griddle marks. Toss the cold watermelon and shallots with the rest of the mint leaves and some salt. Divide between four plates, or pile onto a platter. Put the hot halloumi on top. Squeeze over some lemon juice and top with some of the breadcrumb and caper mix. Serve immediately."]
'Cauliflower steaks with roasted red pepper & olive salsa', ["1 cauliflower","½ tsp smoked paprika","2 tbsp olive oil","1 roasted red pepper","4 black olives, pitted","small handful parsley","1 tsp capers","½ tbsp red wine vinegar","2 tbsp toasted flaked almonds"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 220C/200C fan/gas 7 and line a baking tray with baking parchment. Slice the cauliflower into two 1-inch steaks – use the middle part as it’s larger, and save the rest for another time. Rub the paprika and ½ tbsp oil over the steaks and season. Put on the tray and roast for 15-20 mins until cooked through.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, make the salsa. Chop the pepper, olives, parsley and capers, and put into a bowl and mix with the remaining oil and vinegar. Season to taste. When the steaks are cooked, spoon over the salsa and top with flaked almonds to serve."]
'One-pan nachos with black beans', ["175g yellow or blue tortilla chips","200g fresh tomato salsa","150g medium cheddar , grated","1 red pepper , quartered, cored and finely chopped","400g can black beans , drained","1 avocado , diced","soured cream , to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Arrange the tortilla chips over two-thirds of the tray, spoon most of the salsa on top and scatter over half of the cheese.","STEP 2","Mix the remaining salsa with the red pepper and beans, and tip onto the empty third of the tray. Scatter over the rest of the cheese. Bake for 10-15 mins or until the cheese has melted. Scatter the avocado over the beans and add dollops of the soured cream to serve."]
'Roast side of salmon with chermoula', ["850g side of salmon","3 tbsp olive oil","1 tsp coriander seeds","1 tsp cumin seeds","½ small pack mint , leaves picked","½ small pack coriander","small handful tarragon","1 lemon , zested and juiced","1 fat garlic clove","½ tsp chilli flakes"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Line the bottom of a roasting tin that’s large enough to fit the salmon in with baking parchment. Brush ½ tbsp oil over the skin and season all over. Place skin-side down in the tin and roast for 15-20 mins until the salmon is just cooked through.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, toast the coriander and cumin seeds in a dry frying pan. Tip into a blender and add all the remaining ingredients. Blitz to a smooth green sauce, adding enough water to get a drizzling consistency. Season to taste. The chermoula can be made in the morning and kept chilled in the fridge. Put the salmon on a serving platter and drizzle over a little chermoula, with the rest on the side to serve."]
'One-pan nachos with black beans', ["175g yellow or blue tortilla chips","200g fresh tomato salsa","150g medium cheddar , grated","1 red pepper , quartered, cored and finely chopped","400g can black beans , drained","1 avocado , diced","soured cream , to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Arrange the tortilla chips over two-thirds of the tray, spoon most of the salsa on top and scatter over half of the cheese.","STEP 2","Mix the remaining salsa with the red pepper and beans, and tip onto the empty third of the tray. Scatter over the rest of the cheese. Bake for 10-15 mins or until the cheese has melted. Scatter the avocado over the beans and add dollops of the soured cream to serve."]
'Roasted vegetables', ["3 tbsp olive oil","1 aubergine, cut into chunks","2 mixed coloured peppers, such as orange and red, cut into chunks","1 red onion, cut into wedges","2 courgettes, cut into chunks","4 garlic cloves, smashed","3 sprigs of thyme","200g cherry tomatoes","handful of basil leaves","zest of 1 lemon","50g feta, crumbled"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 200C/180C Fan/gas 6. Mix the oil with the aubergine, peppers, red onion, courgette, garlic and thyme in a bowl with sea salt and black pepper. Tip into a large roasting tin then roast for 30 mins. Add the tomatoes to the pan and return to the oven for 10 mins.","STEP 2","Squeeze the garlic from their skins, remove the thyme then scatter over the basil, lemon zest and crumbled feta."]
'Steak & aubergine salad', ["1 aubergine , halved lengthways, cut into thin slices","2 tbsp flour","3 ½ tbsp olive oil","1 sirloin steak","100g lamb’s lettuce","50g feta , cut into cubes","1 green chilli , halved and chopped","½ lemon , juiced","½small pack coriander , plus extra leaves to serve","½small pack mint , plus extra leaves to serve"], ["STEP 1","Dust the aubergine slices in the flour, mixed with some seasoning. Heat 2 tbsp of the olive oil in a large frying pan until shimmering. Add the aubergine to the pan and fry for a few mins on each side until collapsing and soft, then set aside. Turn up the heat, season the steak, then add to the pan and fry for 2 mins on each side for rare (longer if you want it medium). Set aside to rest for 5 mins, then slice.","STEP 2","Blitz the remaining olive oil in a blender or small food processor with the rest of the dressing ingredients and a splash of water. When ready to serve, mix half the dressing with the lamb’s lettuce, then tip onto a plate. Top with the crispy aubergine and steak, crumble over the feta, then drizzle over the remaining dressing. Scatter over the remaining herbs and serve."]
'Mix & match seafood tacos', ["8 crispy corn taco shells","2 sushi-grade skinless salmon fillets (about 250g), cut into 1cm cubes (ask your fishmonger)","2 tbsp soy sauce","2 tbsp Yuzu juice or lime juice","1 tsp sesame oil","1 avocado , stoned, peeled and cubed","nori seaweed , sliced, to serve","1 tsp olive oil","1 crushed garlic","1 tsp crushed ginger","3 spring onions , sliced, plus extra to serve","1⁄2 tsp finely chopped red chilli","250g raw king prawns , roughly chopped","1 lime , zested and juiced, plus wedges to serve","1⁄2 small bunch coriander , leaves picked"], ["STEP 1","For the salmon, combine all the ingredients, except the avocado and seaweed, in a bowl and mix well. Cover and leave to marinate in the fridge while you prepare the other ingredients.","STEP 2","For the prawns, heat the olive oil in a pan over a high heat. Add the garlic, ginger, spring onions and chilli, stirring into the oil for 20 secs. Add the prawns and stir constantly until cooked through and pink. Remove from the heat and stir through the lime zest and juice.","STEP 3","Stir the avocado into the salmon and warm the taco shells following pack instructions. Fill each taco with the prawns or the salmon. Top the salmon tacos with the seaweed and the prawn tacos with coriander and extra spring onions. Squeeze over lime wedges to serve."]
'Strawberry & elderflower gateau', ["2 x 200g sponge flan cases (25cm)","6 tbsp strawberry jam or conserve","400g strawberries (look for ones that are a similar size), halved","600ml double cream","2 tbsp icing sugar , plus 150g","5 tbsp elderflower cordial","5-6 raspberries or some pink food colouring gel","small handful pistachios (optional), slivered or roughly chopped (see tip)","strawberry coulis or cream, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Remove the base of a 20cm loose-bottomed cake tin (make sure it’s a deep one) and use it as a template to cut out a circle from each flan case. Chop the offcuts from the flans into small pieces and set aside. Reassemble the tin and line it with a couple of sheets of cling film, leaving enough overhanging to wrap up once the tin is filled.","STEP 2","Put one flan disc in the base of the tin and spread over half the jam. Arrange the strawberries around the outside with the cut surface facing outwards. If you have any particularly large or small strawberries, put them to one side.","STEP 3","Whip the cream, 2 tbsp icing sugar and 3 tbsp elderflower cordial together in a bowl until the mixture holds its shape. Chop the reserved strawberries, then fold them into the cream mixture. Use half of the cream to fill the centre of the gateau, spreading right to the edges so it holds the strawberries in place.","STEP 4","Push a single layer of the chopped flan offcuts into the cream (you may have some leftovers to nibble on), and drizzle over the remaining elderflower cordial. Stir the remaining jam through the rest of the cream, spread it over the flan pieces, and top with the final piece of flan. Fold over the cling film and give the gateau a gentle press down to compact the layers. Chill while you make the icing. Can be chilled for up to 24 hrs.","STEP 5","Crush the raspberries with the back of a fork and stir in the 150g icing sugar to make a thick icing. Add a splash of water if it’s too thick. Alternatively, add enough water to the icing sugar to make a thick icing, then stir in a few drops of pink food colouring.","STEP 6","When you’re ready to serve, remove the cake from the tin and discard the cling film, then transfer to a cake stand. Spread the icing right to the edges, then scatter the pistachios in a ring around the top, if using, and serve with a little strawberry coulis or cream on the side, if you like."]
'Roast new potatoes & radishes', ["600g new potatoes , halved, larger ones quartered","500g radishes , halved, larger ones quartered","4 tbsp olive oil","2 tsp black mustard seeds","1 tsp chilli flakes , plus extra to serve (optional)","30g pumpkin seeds","150g Greek yogurt","2 spring onions , thinly sliced (green parts and all)"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Put the potatoes in a saucepan of water, bring to the boil and cook for 8 mins. Drain and leave to steam dry.","STEP 2","Put the potatoes in one roasting tin and the radishes into another. Divide the oil between them, along with the mustard seeds and chilli flakes. Season and give everything a good mix. Put in the oven and roast for 25 mins, then take out the radishes and roast the potatoes for an extra 10 mins until crisp. Meanwhile, toast the pumpkin seeds in a dry frying pan.","STEP 3","Spread the yogurt onto a sharing platter. Pile on the potatoes and radishes, then scatter over the spring onions, pumpkin seeds and a few more chilli flakes, if you like."]
'Campfire smoky bean brekkie', ["4 tbsp olive or rapeseed oil","3-4 rosemary sprigs","6 chipolatas","12 small cooking chorizo , halved","6 good-quality smoked hot dog sausages , cut into large chunks","2 onions , chopped","500ml carton passata","300g good quality BBQ sauce (we used Stokes)","2 x 400g cans borlotti beans , drained","2 x 400g cans haricot beans , drained","8-10 eggs","toast , to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a large paella pan (ours was 45cm). Add the rosemary and sizzle for a minute or 2, then scoop it out to a plate and set aside. Add the chipolatas and brown all over, push to one side of the pan and add the other sausages. Cook for a few mins until the chorizo starts to release some of its oil, then push these aside too. Add the onions and cook until soft, about 8 mins.","STEP 2","Add the passata, BBQ sauce and some seasoning, bring to a simmer and bubble for a few mins, then stir in the beans and bring everything back to a bubble.","STEP 3","Using the back of a spoon, create little spaces in the beans and crack in the eggs, dotting them over the surface. Cover the pan with foil and cook gently for 10 mins or until the eggs are cooked to your liking. Top with the rosemary and serve with buttered toast and mugs of tea."]
'Swedish meatballs with beetroot & apple salad', ["500g lean pork mince (5% fat)","100g coarsely grated courgette , squeezed of excess juice","1 onion , grated","4 tbsp chopped fresh dill","2 garlic cloves , finely grated","1 egg","1 tbsp rapeseed oil","1 tsp thyme leaves","2 tsp vegetable bouillon powder , made up to 300ml with boiling water","2 tbsp half-fat crème fraîche","1 large apple , chopped","1 red onion , halved and thinly sliced","4 tbsp chopped parsley","2 tsp capers","½ lemon , juiced","320g cooked beetroot , cut into strips"], ["STEP 1","To make the meatballs, tip the pork into a bowl and add the grated courgette and onion, half the dill, half the garlic and plenty of black pepper. Break in the egg and mix well with your hands. When everything is well combined, break off walnut-size pieces and roll into balls – you should end up with about 28. The mixture will be very soft.","STEP 2","Heat the oil in a large non-stick frying pan then gently fry the meatballs in two batches until firm and pale golden, turning them every now and then so they brown evenly. Each batch should take 6-8 mins.","STEP 3","Wipe out the pan to remove excess fat and add the remaining garlic and thyme, then pour in the bouillon and bring to the boil. Turn off the heat, stir in the crème fraîche and remaining dill, then return the meatballs to the pan and turn them in the mixture until coated.","STEP 4","For the salad, mix the apple, onion, parsley and capers with the lemon, then stir through the beetroot. Serve the salad alongside the meatballs. If you’re cooking for two people, eat half the meatballs and salad now, and chill the rest for another day – it will keep in the fridge for up to three days. Reheat the meatballs in the microwave until piping hot."]
'Herbed Jersey Royal crab cakes', ["400g Jersey Royal potatoes , scrubbed not peeled","2 tbsp olive oil","pinch of fennel seeds","¼ bulb of fennel , finely chopped","1 red chilli , deseeded and finely chopped","1 garlic clove , crushed","4 spring onions , sliced","handful of samphire (optional)","200g cooked crabmeat , a mix of white and brown","finely chopped soft herbs (a mixture of dill, parsley and tarragon works well), plus extra to serve","1 tbsp capers","pinch of cayenne pepper","1 lemon , 1/2 zested and juiced, 1/2 cut into wedges for serving","1 tbsp mayonnaise , plus extra to serve","flour ,  for dusting","watercress , to serve"], ["STEP 1","Put the potatoes in a pan, cover with water, add 1 tsp salt and bring to the boil. Cook for 12-15 mins or until tender enough to smash. Leave to cool.","STEP 2","Heat 1 tbsp of the oil in a frying pan and add the fennel seeds, fennel, chilli and garlic followed by the spring onions. Gently cook for 3-5 mins until fragrant but not coloured. During the last minute, add the samphire.","STEP 3","In a bowl, mash the potatoes until well broken down, then combine with the crabmeat, herbs, spring onion mix, cayenne, lemon zest and mayo. Season and mix until well combined, then chill for 30 mins.","STEP 4","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Oil your hands and shape the mixture into eight palm-sized patties and dip in plenty of flour. Be careful, as they are quite fragile and sticky – a good way to do this is on a tray lined with baking parchment. If you have time, put in the fridge to set for 30 mins before cooking. Heat the remaining oil in a non-stick frying pan and fry for 2-3 mins on each side until crisp and golden. Transfer to an oiled baking tray and finish in the oven for 5 mins. Serve with mayo, some watercress tossed with the remaining herbs, and the lemon juice with the lemon wedges on the side."]
'Strawberry shortcake slice', ["600ml double cream","1 tbsp vanilla bean paste","1 tbsp orange blossom water","125g icing sugar , plus 2 tbsp","500g shortcake biscuits , plus 3 crushed","350g strawberries , sliced"], ["STEP 1","Line a 20cm cake tin or dish (either a square or rectangle works well) with cling film, leaving\xa0an overhang. Whip 500ml of the cream, the vanilla, orange blossom water and 125g icing sugar with an electric whisk until thick and billowy.","STEP 2","Add a layer of biscuits to the tin, and spoon over some of the cream, about 1cm thick all over. Add a layer of strawberry slices, then repeat with the cream, biscuits and strawberries until you fill the tin, finishing on a layer of biscuit. You’ll have some strawberries left over to serve. Press everything down well so every biscuit is covered in cream. Cover and chill overnight.","STEP 3","To serve, flip the tin onto a serving plate, and remove the cling film. Whip the remaining 100ml cream with 1 tbsp icing sugar and dollop on top of the cake, swirling it around. Top with the remaining strawberry slices in lines, sift over the remaining 1 tbsp icing sugar, and sprinkle the biscuit crumbs in between the rows of strawberries. Cut into slices to serve."]
'Smashed chicken with corn slaw', ["4 skinless chicken breast fillets","1 lime , zested and juiced","2 tbsp bio yogurt","1 tsp fresh thyme leaves","¼ tsp turmeric","2 tbsp finely chopped coriander","1 garlic clove , finely grated","1 tsp rapeseed oil","1 small avocado","1 lime , zested and juiced","2 tbsp bio yogurt","2 tbsp finely chopped coriander","160g corn , cut from 2 cobs","1 red pepper , deseeded and chopped","1 red onion , halved and finely sliced","320g white cabbage , finely sliced","150g new potatoes , boiled, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Cut the chicken breasts in half, then put them between two sheets of baking parchment and bash with a rolling pin to flatten. Mix the lime zest and juice with the yogurt, thyme, turmeric, coriander and garlic in a large bowl. Add the chicken and stir until well coated. Leave to marinate while you make the slaw.","STEP 2","Mash the avocado with the lime juice and zest, 2 tbsp yogurt and the coriander. Stir in the corn, red pepper, onion and cabbage.","STEP 3","Heat a large non-stick frying pan or griddle pan, then cook the chicken in batches for a few mins each side – they’ll cook quickly as they’re thin. Serve the hot chicken with the slaw and the new potatoes. If you\'re cooking for two, chill half\xa0the chicken and slaw for lunch another day (eat within two days)."]
'Pineapple & pork skewers', ["400g pork fillet","4 tbsp light muscovado sugar","60ml cider vinegar","1 tsp fish sauce","½ small pineapple , peeled, cored and cut into chunks (or use ready prepped fresh pineapple, drained well)","1 green pepper , deseeded and cut into squares (optional)","4 spring onions , trimmed and cut into 4 equal lengths","small bunch coriander , chopped (optional)","cooked rice or pitta, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Cut the pork into cubes. Heat the sugar and vinegar in a pan over a low heat until the sugar melts. Add the fish sauce and cool. Tip in the pork and mix well so that all the cubes are covered in sauce.","STEP 2","Heat the barbecue. If you are using coals, wait until they turn white. If you are indoors, heat a griddle pan. Thread the pork and pineapple onto skewers, alternating pieces with the pepper and spring onion.","STEP 3","Barbecue or griddle the skewers for 3-4 mins each side (you may need to cook them for longer if griddling). Sprinkle with coriander, if you like, then serve with rice or slide into pitta breads."]
'Raspberry cordial', ["500g raspberry","500g caster sugar","3 tbsp red wine vinegar"], ["STEP 1","Put the raspberries in a pan with the sugar and vinegar. Mash over a low heat for 10 mins until smooth and syrupy. Rub through a sieve into a clean pan.","STEP 2","Tip the seeds from the sieve into a bowl and stir in 300ml water, then sieve again to remove the last of the pulp from seeds. Pour the liquid into the pan with the sieved pulp, stir well and boil for 1 min. Pour into small sterilised bottles and seal. The cordial will keep unopened for a few months. Once opened, store in the fridge."]
'Griddled vegetables with melting aubergines', ["1 large aubergine","½a  lemon , zested and juiced","3cloves of garlic , 1 crushed, 2 chopped","2 tbsp chopped parsley , plus extra to serve","1 tsp extra virgin olive oil , plus a little for drizzling","4 tsp omega seed mix (see tip)","2 tsp thyme leaves","1 tbsp rapeseed oil","1 red pepper , deseeded and cut into quarters","1 large onion , thickly sliced","2 courgettes , sliced on the angle","2 large tomatoes , each cut into 3 thick slices","8 Kalamata olives , halved"], ["STEP 1","Grill the aubergine, turning frequently, until soft all over and the skin is blistered, about 8-10 mins. Alternatively, if you have a gas hob, cook it directly over the flame. When it is cool enough to handle, remove the skin, finely chop the flesh and mix with the lemon juice, 1 chopped clove garlic, 1 tbsp parsley, 1 tsp extra virgin olive oil and the seeds. Mix the remaining parsley with the remaining chopped garlic and the lemon zest.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, mix the thyme, crushed garlic and rapeseed oil and toss with the vegetables, keeping the onions as slices rather than breaking up into rings. Heat a large griddle pan and char the vegetables until tender and marked with lines – the tomatoes will need the least time. Pile onto plates with the aubergine purée and olives, drizzle over a little extra olive oil and scatter with the parsley, lemon zest and garlic."]
'Mint & basil griddled peach salad', ["1 lime , zested and juiced","1 tbsp rapeseed oil","2 tbsp finely chopped mint , plus a few whole leaves to serve","2 tbsp basil , chopped","2 peaches (300g), quartered","75g quinoa","160g fine beans , trimmed and halved","1 small red onion , very finely chopped","1 large Little Gem lettuce (165g), roughly chopped","½ x 60g pack rocket","1 small avocado , stoned and sliced"], ["STEP 1","Mix the lime zest and juice, oil, mint and basil, then put half in a bowl with the peaches. Meanwhile, cook the quinoa following pack instructions.","STEP 2","Cook the beans for 3-4 mins until just tender. Meanwhile, griddle the peaches for 1 min on each side. If you don’t have a griddle pan, use a large non-stick frying pan with a drop of oil.","STEP 3","Drain the quinoa and divide between shallow bowls. Toss the warm beans and onion in the remaining mint mixture and pile on top of the quinoa with the lettuce and rocket. Top with the avocado and peaches and scatter over the mint leaves. Serve while still warm."]
'Fennel, roast lemon & tomato salad', ["2 lemons","2 tbsp extra virgin olive oil","pinch of sugar","500g mixed tomatoes (I used cherry tomatoes and some larger ones)","3 fennel bulbs","100g pomegranate seeds","1⁄2 small pack tarragon leaves","1⁄2 small pack parsley leaves","1⁄2 small pack mint leaves"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6 and line a baking tray with baking parchment. Slice 1 lemon into thin rounds and spread out on the baking tray, drizzle over 1/2 tbsp oil and sprinkle over the sugar. Roast for 20-25 mins until shrivelled and caramelised in places. Keep an eye on them – you may have to take some out the oven before the others are done. These can be made in the morning and kept at room temperature.","STEP 2","While the lemons are cooking, roughly chop the tomatoes and thinly slice the fennel, saving the fronds. Put in a bowl with the remaining olive oil, juice from the other lemon and pomegranate seeds. Season to taste, then give everything a good mix.","STEP 3","When you’re ready to serve, roughly chop all the herbs and mix them into the salad along with the roasted lemons and fennel fronds."]
'Swedish meatballs with beetroot & apple salad', ["500g lean pork mince (5% fat)","100g coarsely grated courgette , squeezed of excess juice","1 onion , grated","4 tbsp chopped fresh dill","2 garlic cloves , finely grated","1 egg","1 tbsp rapeseed oil","1 tsp thyme leaves","2 tsp vegetable bouillon powder , made up to 300ml with boiling water","2 tbsp half-fat crème fraîche","1 large apple , chopped","1 red onion , halved and thinly sliced","4 tbsp chopped parsley","2 tsp capers","½ lemon , juiced","320g cooked beetroot , cut into strips"], ["STEP 1","To make the meatballs, tip the pork into a bowl and add the grated courgette and onion, half the dill, half the garlic and plenty of black pepper. Break in the egg and mix well with your hands. When everything is well combined, break off walnut-size pieces and roll into balls – you should end up with about 28. The mixture will be very soft.","STEP 2","Heat the oil in a large non-stick frying pan then gently fry the meatballs in two batches until firm and pale golden, turning them every now and then so they brown evenly. Each batch should take 6-8 mins.","STEP 3","Wipe out the pan to remove excess fat and add the remaining garlic and thyme, then pour in the bouillon and bring to the boil. Turn off the heat, stir in the crème fraîche and remaining dill, then return the meatballs to the pan and turn them in the mixture until coated.","STEP 4","For the salad, mix the apple, onion, parsley and capers with the lemon, then stir through the beetroot. Serve the salad alongside the meatballs. If you’re cooking for two people, eat half the meatballs and salad now, and chill the rest for another day – it will keep in the fridge for up to three days. Reheat the meatballs in the microwave until piping hot."]
'Tear-and-share cheese & garlic rolls', ["100g unsalted butter , softened","450g strong white bread flour","7g sachet fast-action dried yeast","1 tsp golden caster sugar","rapeseed oil , for the bowl and tray","2 tbsp polenta or cornmeal","1 garlic clove , grated","100g mozzarella , grated","50g cheddar , grated"], ["STEP 1","Heat 280ml water in a saucepan for a minute until warm but not too hot to stick your finger in (don’t burn yourself!). Remove from the heat, then add 50g butter. Combine the flour, yeast, sugar and 1 tsp salt in a large bowl or a tabletop mixer. Add the warm water and beat to make a soft dough. Knead for 10 mins by hand, or 5 mins in a mixer, until the dough feels stretchy and smooth. Tip into a clean, oiled bowl and cover with oiled cling film. Leave to rise for 1½-2 hrs, or until doubled in size.","STEP 2","Brush a large baking tray with oil and scatter over the polenta. Knock the air out of the dough. Pinch off small pieces (about the size of a walnut), then roll each piece into a ball and put on the baking tray. Leave a little space between each dough ball.","STEP 3","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Cover the tray with oiled cling film, then prove for 30 mins-1 hr until the dough has doubled in size and the balls are touching. Mix the remaining butter with the garlic. When the rolls are ready to cook, brush the tops with the garlic butter and scatter with the cheeses. Bake for 25-30 mins until the dough balls are cooked through. Leave to cool for 5 mins, then serve."]
'Salmon picnic platter', ["4 eggs","2-3 tbsp mayonnaise","a little cayenne pepper","200g cooked salmon","100g hot-smoked salmon","6 small rolls , halved","3 tbsp cream cheese","100g smoked salmon","1 lemon , 1/2 zested and 1/2 cut into wedges","½ cucumber","2 tbsp Greek yogurt","1 tbsp chopped dill or chives","bread , soft rolls or wraps, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Hard boil the eggs by cooking them in boiling water for 8 mins, then cool quickly under cold running water and peel. Halve the eggs and pop the yolks into a bowl. Mash the yolks with the mayonnaise, cayenne pepper and some seasoning. Spoon or pipe the mixture back into the egg halves and chill until you need them.","STEP 2","Flake the cooked salmon into large chunks and put it on a platter with the hot-smoked salmon and the eggs.","STEP 3","Spread the bottom half of the rolls with cream cheese, then add the smoked salmon and a squeeze of lemon juice and top with the other half of the roll. Cut each one in half.","STEP 4","Peel and slice the cucumber. Mix the yogurt with the dill, lemon zest and some seasoning, then stir in the cucumber. Pile the mixture into the centre of the platter. Serve with extra bread, rolls or wraps and lemon wedges."]
'Campfire smoky bean brekkie', ["4 tbsp olive or rapeseed oil","3-4 rosemary sprigs","6 chipolatas","12 small cooking chorizo , halved","6 good-quality smoked hot dog sausages , cut into large chunks","2 onions , chopped","500ml carton passata","300g good quality BBQ sauce (we used Stokes)","2 x 400g cans borlotti beans , drained","2 x 400g cans haricot beans , drained","8-10 eggs","toast , to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a large paella pan (ours was 45cm). Add the rosemary and sizzle for a minute or 2, then scoop it out to a plate and set aside. Add the chipolatas and brown all over, push to one side of the pan and add the other sausages. Cook for a few mins until the chorizo starts to release some of its oil, then push these aside too. Add the onions and cook until soft, about 8 mins.","STEP 2","Add the passata, BBQ sauce and some seasoning, bring to a simmer and bubble for a few mins, then stir in the beans and bring everything back to a bubble.","STEP 3","Using the back of a spoon, create little spaces in the beans and crack in the eggs, dotting them over the surface. Cover the pan with foil and cook gently for 10 mins or until the eggs are cooked to your liking. Top with the rosemary and serve with buttered toast and mugs of tea."]
'Frozen margarita', ["50ml tequila","25ml triple sec (we used Cointreau)","25ml lime juice","15ml sugar syrup (see \'Goes well with\' below)","large handful of ice","wedge of lime , to garnish"], ["STEP 1","Put all the ingredients except the lime wedge in a blender and blitz until smooth. Tip into a cocktail, margarita or rocks glass, garnish and serve."]
'Pepper & lemon spaghetti with basil & pine nuts', ["1 tbsp rapeseed oil","1 red pepper , deseeded and diced","150g wholemeal spaghetti","2 courgettes (250g), grated","2 garlic cloves , finely grated","1 lemon , zested and juiced","15g basil , finely chopped","25g pine nuts , toasted","2 tbsp finely grated parmesan or vegetarian alternative (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a large non-stick frying pan. Add the pepper and cook for 5 mins. Meanwhile, cook the pasta for 10-12 mins until tender.","STEP 2","Add the courgette and garlic to the pepper and cook, stirring very frequently, for 10-15 mins until the courgette is really soft.","STEP 3","Stir in the lemon zest and juice, basil and spaghetti (reserve some pasta water) and toss together, adding a little of the pasta water until nicely coated. Add the pine nuts, then spoon into bowls and serve topped with the parmesan, if using."]
'Mozzarella sticks', ["400g block mozzarella (not in water)","50g flour","2 eggs","150g breadcrumbs","2 tsp smoked paprika","2 tsp dried oregano","vegetable or sunflower oil for frying","dips , to serve"], ["STEP 1","Cut the mozzarella into ‘chips’. Tip the flour into a bowl and season well. Whisk the eggs in a second bowl and tip the breadcrumbs, paprika and oregano into a third. Coat the mozzarella sticks in the flour, then the egg, then the breadcrumbs. Transfer to a parchment-lined tray and freeze for at least 2 hrs.","STEP 2","Heat enough oil to come 2-3cm up the side of a saucepan. When hot, drop in a test chip – it should sizzle straight away and brown within a minute or two. The secret is to cook them long enough to crisp up the outside without letting the mozzarella ooze out – it may take you a few practice chips to get it right. Cook the chips in batches and drain on kitchen paper. Serve hot with your favourite dip."]
'Cheesy seafood bake', ["300g medium potatoes (about 3), thinly sliced","2 tbsp milk","40g mature cheddar , finely grated","1 tsp rapeseed oil","1 onion (160g), finely chopped","1 red pepper , deseeded and finely diced (270g)","2 tsp balsamic vinegar","1 tsp vegetable bouillon powder","400g can chopped tomatoes","½ x 30g pack basil , leaves picked and finely chopped","1 garlic clove , finely grated","280g pack skinless cod loins","100g frozen small Atlantic cooked prawns , defrosted","160g broccoli florets"], ["STEP 1","Boil the potato slices for 10 mins then drain, tip into a bowl and gently mix in the milk and half the cheese. Don’t worry if the potatoes break up a little.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, heat the oil in a large frying pan and cook the onion until softened. Stir in the pepper and cook for 5 mins more. Spoon in the balsamic vinegar and bouillon powder, then stir in the tomatoes, basil and garlic. Lay the cod fillets on top, then cover and cook for 6-8 mins until the cod flakes when tested. Heat the grill to high.","STEP 3","Take off the heat, stir in the prawns and tip into a shallow baking dish, breaking up the cod into large chunks. Cover with the potatoes and sprinkle with the remaining cheese. Grill until golden. While it’s grilling, steam or boil the broccoli to serve with the bake."]
'Salted tomato salad', ["300g heritage tomatoes , various shapes and sizes","1 red onion","1 garlic clove","8 small basil leaves","1 tbsp olive oil","1 tbsp nigella seeds"], ["STEP 1","Chop the tomatoes into equal-sized chunks and slice the onion, then transfer them to a bowl. Grate the garlic, then add to the tomatoes, along with the basil leaves.","STEP 2","Sprinkle with ½ tsp salt, pour over the oil and toss together. Leave to infuse for up to 30 mins, then serve sprinkled with nigella seeds."]
'Roasted asparagus & pea salad', ["3 tbsp natural yogurt","1 tsp wholegrain mustard","½ tsp honey","½ lemon , zested and juiced","100g watercress","1 large slice sourdough bread","200g asparagus , tough ends removed","1 ½ tbsp cold-pressed rapeseed oil","2 eggs","200g frozen peas"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 220C/200C fan/gas 7. Mix the yogurt, mustard and honey together. Add the lemon zest, then add the juice and some seasoning to taste. Squeeze any remaining lemon juice over the watercress.","STEP 2","Tear the bread into rough chunks and put them on a large roasting tray with the asparagus. Toss both in the rapeseed oil and seasoning, and roast for 10 mins until the asparagus is tender and croutons are golden.","STEP 3","Meanwhile, cook the eggs in a pan of boiling water for 6 mins, then add the frozen peas and cook for 1 min more. Drain and rinse both under cold water until cool. Peel the eggs, then cut into quarters.","STEP 4","To assemble, mix the asparagus and peas through the watercress, then toss through the creamy dressing. Nestle in the eggs and croutons, and serve."]
'Apricot & pistachio frangipane blondies', ["100g unsalted butter , melted, plus a little extra for the tin","200g light muscovado sugar","½ tsp fennel seeds","1 large egg","120g plain flour","50g pistachios , roughly chopped","1-2 tbsp milk","6 large ripe apricots , halved and stoned","65g golden caster sugar","80g unsalted butter , softened","1 egg","100g pistachios , ground to crumbs"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6 and butter and line a rectangular baking tin, approx 20 x 25cm. To make the frangipane, beat together the sugar and butter until fluffy, then add the egg and pistachios.","STEP 2","In a bowl, stir together the muscovado sugar, fennel seeds and melted butter with a pinch of salt. Add the egg and stir vigorously, then tip in the flour and half the pistachios and fold until well combined and no streaks remain. Add the milk to loosen.","STEP 3","Spoon two-thirds of the batter into the tin and smooth with the back of a metal spoon or spatula, then arrange the apricot halves on top and press into the batter. Dot the frangipane around the batter too, then top with the remaining spoonfuls of batter so that it’s part covering the frangipane and apricots. Scatter over the rest of the pistachios. Bake for 25-30 mins until a skewer comes out with some crumbs that are a little moist, but not raw. Cool completely in the tin, then cut into 12 squares."]
'Strawberry, feta & thyme tart', ["100g crème fraîche","3 thyme sprigs, leaves picked, plus extra to serve","100g vegetarian feta , crumbled","1⁄2 garlic clove , crushed","1⁄2 lemon , zested","pinch chilli flakes","1 sheet ready rolled puff pastry (about 320g)","200g strawberries , sliced","rocket salad , to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6, and put a baking sheet in the oven to warm up.","STEP 2","Mash the crème fraîche, thyme, feta, garlic, lemon, chilli and some seasoning in a bowl with a fork until fairly smooth.","STEP 3","Unravel the pastry onto a piece of baking parchment and score a 1cm border around the edge with a sharp knife. Spread the crème fraîche mixture onto the tart, smoothing over up to the border edges. Scatter the strawberry slices over and bake for 25 mins until golden and puffed up. Scatter over more thyme leaves and serve with a rocket salad and a chilled glass of rosé."]
'Tear-and-share cheese & garlic rolls', ["100g unsalted butter , softened","450g strong white bread flour","7g sachet fast-action dried yeast","1 tsp golden caster sugar","rapeseed oil , for the bowl and tray","2 tbsp polenta or cornmeal","1 garlic clove , grated","100g mozzarella , grated","50g cheddar , grated"], ["STEP 1","Heat 280ml water in a saucepan for a minute until warm but not too hot to stick your finger in (don’t burn yourself!). Remove from the heat, then add 50g butter. Combine the flour, yeast, sugar and 1 tsp salt in a large bowl or a tabletop mixer. Add the warm water and beat to make a soft dough. Knead for 10 mins by hand, or 5 mins in a mixer, until the dough feels stretchy and smooth. Tip into a clean, oiled bowl and cover with oiled cling film. Leave to rise for 1½-2 hrs, or until doubled in size.","STEP 2","Brush a large baking tray with oil and scatter over the polenta. Knock the air out of the dough. Pinch off small pieces (about the size of a walnut), then roll each piece into a ball and put on the baking tray. Leave a little space between each dough ball.","STEP 3","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Cover the tray with oiled cling film, then prove for 30 mins-1 hr until the dough has doubled in size and the balls are touching. Mix the remaining butter with the garlic. When the rolls are ready to cook, brush the tops with the garlic butter and scatter with the cheeses. Bake for 25-30 mins until the dough balls are cooked through. Leave to cool for 5 mins, then serve."]
'Salmon picnic platter', ["4 eggs","2-3 tbsp mayonnaise","a little cayenne pepper","200g cooked salmon","100g hot-smoked salmon","6 small rolls , halved","3 tbsp cream cheese","100g smoked salmon","1 lemon , 1/2 zested and 1/2 cut into wedges","½ cucumber","2 tbsp Greek yogurt","1 tbsp chopped dill or chives","bread , soft rolls or wraps, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Hard boil the eggs by cooking them in boiling water for 8 mins, then cool quickly under cold running water and peel. Halve the eggs and pop the yolks into a bowl. Mash the yolks with the mayonnaise, cayenne pepper and some seasoning. Spoon or pipe the mixture back into the egg halves and chill until you need them.","STEP 2","Flake the cooked salmon into large chunks and put it on a platter with the hot-smoked salmon and the eggs.","STEP 3","Spread the bottom half of the rolls with cream cheese, then add the smoked salmon and a squeeze of lemon juice and top with the other half of the roll. Cut each one in half.","STEP 4","Peel and slice the cucumber. Mix the yogurt with the dill, lemon zest and some seasoning, then stir in the cucumber. Pile the mixture into the centre of the platter. Serve with extra bread, rolls or wraps and lemon wedges."]
'Vegan vanilla ice cream', ["2 x 400g cans coconut milk (not light)","175g caster sugar","1 tsp sea salt flakes","1 vanilla pod or 1 tbsp vanilla bean paste","2 tbsp cornflour","a pinch turmeric"], ["STEP 1","Pour most of the coconut milk into a saucepan, reserving a splash in a small bowl for later. Add the sugar,\xa0salt and turmeric (for colour) to the pan. Cut the vanilla pod in half lengthways (if using) and scrape the seeds out of both sides with the side of the knife. Put the seeds and the pod, or vanilla paste, into the pan. Warm on a low heat\xa0for 10 mins until the sugar has melted\xa0and the mixture\xa0starts to steam.","STEP 2","Mix the cornflour with the reserved coconut milk in a small bowl until smooth. Pour into the hot milk, and continually whisking, heat for another 5-10 mins until the mixture thickens to a pourable custard consistency. Strain into a bowl, and cover. Leave to cool, then chill for at least 2 hrs.","STEP 3","Pour the chilled mix into an ice cream maker, and churn for 20-30 mins until you get a soft scoop ice cream. Transfer to a sealable container and freeze for up to 3 months until ready to serve. If you don’t have an ice cream maker, pour the chilled mix into a wide-based plastic tub or dish. Freeze for 2-3 hrs, stirring the mix every 20 mins with a fork, to break up any large ice crystals, until soft ice cream. Transfer to a smaller tub and freeze until ready to serve. You should be able to scoop the ice cream easily from the freezer, or leave for a few mins at room temperature to soften, if you need to."]
'Lamb kebab burger', ["2 tbsp fat-free yogurt","1 tbsp mayonnaise","1 small  garlic clove , grated","½ tbsp vegetable oil","2 lamb burgers","2 sesame seed burger buns","1 tomato , sliced","20g gherkins , sliced","1 red chilli , finely sliced","leaves of 1 Baby Gem lettuce"], ["STEP 1","Combine the yogurt with the mayonnaise and grated garlic\xa0in\xa0a small bowl. Heat the\xa0vegetable oil in a non-stick frying pan over a medium heat, add the lamb burgers and fry for around 10 mins, turning over halfway through, until piping hot in the centre. Lightly toast the burger buns. Divide the\xa0sliced tomato,\xa0sliced gherkins, the burgers, some garlic sauce, chilli and the lettuce leaves\xa0between each burger bun, then enjoy immediately."]
'Mashed cannellini beans with wilted greens & fried artichokes', ["4 tbsp olive oil","1 garlic clove , crushed","2 thyme sprigs","pinch of red chilli flakes","400g can cannellini beans , drained, 1 tbsp of can water reserved","1 lemon , zested and juiced, plus wedges to serve","200g mixed seasonal greens (I used spinach, watercress, sorrel and rocket)","2 tbsp semolina flour","100g cooked artichoke hearts , in oil","few rosemary sprigs , finely chopped (optional)","parmesan or vegetarian alternative, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Warm 1 tbsp olive oil in a saucepan over a medium heat. Add the garlic, thyme, a pinch of salt and the chilli flakes, and cook for 1 min or so. Tip in the beans, then add a slosh of their water and the juice of 1/2 a lemon. Cook for a few mins, crushing them with a fork or the back of a wooden spoon. Remove from the heat and discard the springs of thyme. Keep warm.","STEP 2","Heat a little olive oil in a non-stick frying pan with a lid. Add the greens and a pinch of salt, then put the lid on to wilt and steam the greens for a few mins until softened. Season and add some of the lemon juice, and tip into a bowl. Keep warm.","STEP 3","Heat 2 tbsp olive oil in the frying pan you used for the greens. Put the semolina flour in a bowl and season. Drain the artichokes and pat them dry with kitchen paper. Dip each one in the flour and put in the pan to shallow fry, turning halfway through, until crisp and golden, around 3-5 mins. Spoon the cannellini beans onto a plate and top with the wilted greens and artichokes. Garnish with lemon zest, rosemary, grated parmesan and extra lemon wedges on the side."]
'Mashed cannellini beans with wilted greens & fried artichokes', ["4 tbsp olive oil","1 garlic clove , crushed","2 thyme sprigs","pinch of red chilli flakes","400g can cannellini beans , drained, 1 tbsp of can water reserved","1 lemon , zested and juiced, plus wedges to serve","200g mixed seasonal greens (I used spinach, watercress, sorrel and rocket)","2 tbsp semolina flour","100g cooked artichoke hearts , in oil","few rosemary sprigs , finely chopped (optional)","parmesan or vegetarian alternative, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Warm 1 tbsp olive oil in a saucepan over a medium heat. Add the garlic, thyme, a pinch of salt and the chilli flakes, and cook for 1 min or so. Tip in the beans, then add a slosh of their water and the juice of 1/2 a lemon. Cook for a few mins, crushing them with a fork or the back of a wooden spoon. Remove from the heat and discard the springs of thyme. Keep warm.","STEP 2","Heat a little olive oil in a non-stick frying pan with a lid. Add the greens and a pinch of salt, then put the lid on to wilt and steam the greens for a few mins until softened. Season and add some of the lemon juice, and tip into a bowl. Keep warm.","STEP 3","Heat 2 tbsp olive oil in the frying pan you used for the greens. Put the semolina flour in a bowl and season. Drain the artichokes and pat them dry with kitchen paper. Dip each one in the flour and put in the pan to shallow fry, turning halfway through, until crisp and golden, around 3-5 mins. Spoon the cannellini beans onto a plate and top with the wilted greens and artichokes. Garnish with lemon zest, rosemary, grated parmesan and extra lemon wedges on the side."]
'Frozen margarita', ["50ml tequila","25ml triple sec (we used Cointreau)","25ml lime juice","15ml sugar syrup (see \'Goes well with\' below)","large handful of ice","wedge of lime , to garnish"], ["STEP 1","Put all the ingredients except the lime wedge in a blender and blitz until smooth. Tip into a cocktail, margarita or rocks glass, garnish and serve."]
'Strawberry shortbread ice cream sandwich', ["4 scoops strawberry cheesecake ice cream , softened","a few fresh strawberries , finely chopped","8 Viennese whirls (or shortbread biscuits)"], ["STEP 1","Mix the ice cream with the strawberries and freeze until solid.","STEP 2","Sandwich spoonfuls of the ice cream between the biscuits, then eat immediately."]
'Tear-and-share cheese & garlic rolls', ["100g unsalted butter , softened","450g strong white bread flour","7g sachet fast-action dried yeast","1 tsp golden caster sugar","rapeseed oil , for the bowl and tray","2 tbsp polenta or cornmeal","1 garlic clove , grated","100g mozzarella , grated","50g cheddar , grated"], ["STEP 1","Heat 280ml water in a saucepan for a minute until warm but not too hot to stick your finger in (don’t burn yourself!). Remove from the heat, then add 50g butter. Combine the flour, yeast, sugar and 1 tsp salt in a large bowl or a tabletop mixer. Add the warm water and beat to make a soft dough. Knead for 10 mins by hand, or 5 mins in a mixer, until the dough feels stretchy and smooth. Tip into a clean, oiled bowl and cover with oiled cling film. Leave to rise for 1½-2 hrs, or until doubled in size.","STEP 2","Brush a large baking tray with oil and scatter over the polenta. Knock the air out of the dough. Pinch off small pieces (about the size of a walnut), then roll each piece into a ball and put on the baking tray. Leave a little space between each dough ball.","STEP 3","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Cover the tray with oiled cling film, then prove for 30 mins-1 hr until the dough has doubled in size and the balls are touching. Mix the remaining butter with the garlic. When the rolls are ready to cook, brush the tops with the garlic butter and scatter with the cheeses. Bake for 25-30 mins until the dough balls are cooked through. Leave to cool for 5 mins, then serve."]
'Steak & aubergine salad', ["1 aubergine , halved lengthways, cut into thin slices","2 tbsp flour","3 ½ tbsp olive oil","1 sirloin steak","100g lamb’s lettuce","50g feta , cut into cubes","1 green chilli , halved and chopped","½ lemon , juiced","½small pack coriander , plus extra leaves to serve","½small pack mint , plus extra leaves to serve"], ["STEP 1","Dust the aubergine slices in the flour, mixed with some seasoning. Heat 2 tbsp of the olive oil in a large frying pan until shimmering. Add the aubergine to the pan and fry for a few mins on each side until collapsing and soft, then set aside. Turn up the heat, season the steak, then add to the pan and fry for 2 mins on each side for rare (longer if you want it medium). Set aside to rest for 5 mins, then slice.","STEP 2","Blitz the remaining olive oil in a blender or small food processor with the rest of the dressing ingredients and a splash of water. When ready to serve, mix half the dressing with the lamb’s lettuce, then tip onto a plate. Top with the crispy aubergine and steak, crumble over the feta, then drizzle over the remaining dressing. Scatter over the remaining herbs and serve."]
'Roast pistachio-stuffed peaches with orange blossom cream', ["6 peaches , halved and pitted","100g pistachios (shelled weight)","½ lemon , finely zested","1 ½ tbsp caster sugar","1 small egg , beaten","3 tsp orange blossom water","250ml apple juice","icing sugar , to serve","250ml double or whipping cream","½ orange , zested","2 tbsp icing sugar (or to taste)","1 tsp orange blossom water"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Put the peach halves in a gratin dish in a single layer without too much space around them (otherwise the apple juice will simply reduce and burn).","STEP 2","Crush the pistachios roughly using a pestle and mortar, then mix in the lemon zest, sugar, egg and 1 tsp orange blossom water. Fill the cavity of each peach with this stuffing, mounding it over the top if you have too much.","STEP 3","Mix the apple juice with the rest of the orange blossom water and pour it around the peaches. Bake for 30-45 mins, depending on ripeness. The peaches should be tender and slightly caramelised on the top.","STEP 4","Whip the cream until it holds its shape, then add the orange zest and sugar, and taste for sweetness. Stir in 1/2 tsp of the orange blossom water and taste. Add more if you like, but be careful not to make the cream too perfumed.","STEP 5","Serve the peaches at room temperature, with a little icing sugar sifted on top, some of the cooking juices spooned around and the cream on the side."]
'Sweetcorn fritters with eggs & black bean salsa', ["1 tsp rapeseed oil","1 small red onion (85g), finely chopped","1 red pepper , deseeded and finely diced","100g wholemeal self-raising flour","1 tsp smoked paprika","1 tsp ground coriander","1 tsp baking powder","325g can sweetcorn , drained","6 large eggs","1 small red onion (85g), finely chopped","4 tomatoes (320g), chopped","2 x 400g cans black beans , drained","1 lime , zested and juiced","½ x 30g pack coriander , chopped"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6 and line a large baking tray with baking parchment.","STEP 2","Heat the oil in a small pan and fry the onion and pepper for 5 mins until softened. Meanwhile, mix the flour, spices and baking powder in a bowl. Add the onions, pepper, corn and 2 of the eggs, then mix together well.","STEP 3","Spoon eight mounds of the mixture onto the baking tray, well spaced apart, then flatten slightly with the back of the spoon. Bake for 20 mins until set and golden.","STEP 4","Meanwhile, mix together the salsa ingredients and poach 2 of the remaining eggs to your liking. If you\'re following our Healthy Diet Plan, serve four fritters on the day you make them, topped with half the salsa and the poached eggs. Chill the remaining fritters for another day. Reheat them in a pan or microwave and serve with 2 more poached eggs and the remaining salsa."]
'Mint & basil griddled peach salad', ["1 lime , zested and juiced","1 tbsp rapeseed oil","2 tbsp finely chopped mint , plus a few whole leaves to serve","2 tbsp basil , chopped","2 peaches (300g), quartered","75g quinoa","160g fine beans , trimmed and halved","1 small red onion , very finely chopped","1 large Little Gem lettuce (165g), roughly chopped","½ x 60g pack rocket","1 small avocado , stoned and sliced"], ["STEP 1","Mix the lime zest and juice, oil, mint and basil, then put half in a bowl with the peaches. Meanwhile, cook the quinoa following pack instructions.","STEP 2","Cook the beans for 3-4 mins until just tender. Meanwhile, griddle the peaches for 1 min on each side. If you don’t have a griddle pan, use a large non-stick frying pan with a drop of oil.","STEP 3","Drain the quinoa and divide between shallow bowls. Toss the warm beans and onion in the remaining mint mixture and pile on top of the quinoa with the lettuce and rocket. Top with the avocado and peaches and scatter over the mint leaves. Serve while still warm."]
'Vegan vanilla ice cream', ["2 x 400g cans coconut milk (not light)","175g caster sugar","1 tsp sea salt flakes","1 vanilla pod or 1 tbsp vanilla bean paste","2 tbsp cornflour","a pinch turmeric"], ["STEP 1","Pour most of the coconut milk into a saucepan, reserving a splash in a small bowl for later. Add the sugar,\xa0salt and turmeric (for colour) to the pan. Cut the vanilla pod in half lengthways (if using) and scrape the seeds out of both sides with the side of the knife. Put the seeds and the pod, or vanilla paste, into the pan. Warm on a low heat\xa0for 10 mins until the sugar has melted\xa0and the mixture\xa0starts to steam.","STEP 2","Mix the cornflour with the reserved coconut milk in a small bowl until smooth. Pour into the hot milk, and continually whisking, heat for another 5-10 mins until the mixture thickens to a pourable custard consistency. Strain into a bowl, and cover. Leave to cool, then chill for at least 2 hrs.","STEP 3","Pour the chilled mix into an ice cream maker, and churn for 20-30 mins until you get a soft scoop ice cream. Transfer to a sealable container and freeze for up to 3 months until ready to serve. If you don’t have an ice cream maker, pour the chilled mix into a wide-based plastic tub or dish. Freeze for 2-3 hrs, stirring the mix every 20 mins with a fork, to break up any large ice crystals, until soft ice cream. Transfer to a smaller tub and freeze until ready to serve. You should be able to scoop the ice cream easily from the freezer, or leave for a few mins at room temperature to soften, if you need to."]
'Easy vanilla cupcakes', ["110g butter , softened","110g golden caster sugar","2 eggs","1 tsp vanilla extract","110g self-raising flour","1-2 tbsp milk , plus a little extra for the icing","125g butter , softened","185g icing sugar"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Line 12 holes in a shallow muffin tin with cupcake cases (not muffin cases). Cream the butter and sugar together until the mixture is light and fluffy. Beat the eggs and vanilla in a jug, then beat into the butter mixture a little at a time.","STEP 2","Fold the flour into the mixture along with a little milk – the mixture should fall easily off a spoon. Divide the mixture between the cases, filling each one no more than half full.","STEP 3","Cook the cakes for 12-15 mins – they should be firm to the touch and slightly golden brown. Cool in the tin for 5 mins, then lift them out gently and leave to cool completely.","STEP 4","To make the icing, beat the butter until it is very soft. Beat in the icing sugar a little at a time, then beat in a splash of the milk as you need to give you a soft icing that can be piped easily. Scrape the icing into an icing bag fitted with a star nozzle. Ice the cakes in swirls, starting in the centre and working outwards."]
'Salted tomato salad', ["300g heritage tomatoes , various shapes and sizes","1 red onion","1 garlic clove","8 small basil leaves","1 tbsp olive oil","1 tbsp nigella seeds"], ["STEP 1","Chop the tomatoes into equal-sized chunks and slice the onion, then transfer them to a bowl. Grate the garlic, then add to the tomatoes, along with the basil leaves.","STEP 2","Sprinkle with ½ tsp salt, pour over the oil and toss together. Leave to infuse for up to 30 mins, then serve sprinkled with nigella seeds."]
'Mix & match seafood tacos', ["8 crispy corn taco shells","2 sushi-grade skinless salmon fillets (about 250g), cut into 1cm cubes (ask your fishmonger)","2 tbsp soy sauce","2 tbsp Yuzu juice or lime juice","1 tsp sesame oil","1 avocado , stoned, peeled and cubed","nori seaweed , sliced, to serve","1 tsp olive oil","1 crushed garlic","1 tsp crushed ginger","3 spring onions , sliced, plus extra to serve","1⁄2 tsp finely chopped red chilli","250g raw king prawns , roughly chopped","1 lime , zested and juiced, plus wedges to serve","1⁄2 small bunch coriander , leaves picked"], ["STEP 1","For the salmon, combine all the ingredients, except the avocado and seaweed, in a bowl and mix well. Cover and leave to marinate in the fridge while you prepare the other ingredients.","STEP 2","For the prawns, heat the olive oil in a pan over a high heat. Add the garlic, ginger, spring onions and chilli, stirring into the oil for 20 secs. Add the prawns and stir constantly until cooked through and pink. Remove from the heat and stir through the lime zest and juice.","STEP 3","Stir the avocado into the salmon and warm the taco shells following pack instructions. Fill each taco with the prawns or the salmon. Top the salmon tacos with the seaweed and the prawn tacos with coriander and extra spring onions. Squeeze over lime wedges to serve."]
'Sweet potatoes with red pepper & halloumi', ["4 medium sweet potatoes","1 tbsp olive oil","8 mint leaves , finely chopped","225g halloumi , cut into 4 slices","4 fat strips grilled red pepper","butter (optional)","1 lemon , halved","small bunch parsley , chopped"], ["STEP 1","Rub each potato with a little oil and salt, then wrap in a double layer of foil.","STEP 2","Pour the oil into a bowl and stir in the mint. Add the halloumi and toss until well coated in the minty oil. Wrap each piece in a strip of pepper. Cut four lengths of foil about 1cm wide and wrap one around the middle of each parcel to hold them together. You could use skewers instead, but be careful not to split the cheese.","STEP 3","Heat the barbecue. When the coals glow red, put the potatoes directly on them. Cook for 30 mins, turning halfway. Unwrap a potato and check if it is cooked through. If not, rewrap and cook more, checking every 10 mins. Alternatively, bake in the oven at 200C/180C fan/gas 6 for 50 mins-1 hr.","STEP 4","Meanwhile cook the pepper parcels on the barbecue or a griddle pan for 3-4 mins each side or until the pepper chars and the cheese melts a bit. Remove from the grill and unwind the foil or remove the skewers. Split the potatoes, add butter if you like, then lay a parcel in the centre of each. Add a squeeze of lemon and scatter over some parsley to serve."]
'Choc hazelnut ice cream sandwich', ["2 scoops chocolate & salted caramel ice cream , softened","4 double chocolate cookies","2 handfuls hazelnuts , roasted and chopped"], ["STEP 1","Put a scoop of ice cream on 2 cookies, then top with 2 more cookies and squish down a bit so the ice cream reaches the edges.","STEP 2","Put the hazelnuts on a plate. Roll the sides of each ice cream sandwich through the nuts, like a wheel, to create a nutty edge, then either pop in the freezer if you want to serve them later, or devour immediately."]
'Choc hazelnut ice cream sandwich', ["2 scoops chocolate & salted caramel ice cream , softened","4 double chocolate cookies","2 handfuls hazelnuts , roasted and chopped"], ["STEP 1","Put a scoop of ice cream on 2 cookies, then top with 2 more cookies and squish down a bit so the ice cream reaches the edges.","STEP 2","Put the hazelnuts on a plate. Roll the sides of each ice cream sandwich through the nuts, like a wheel, to create a nutty edge, then either pop in the freezer if you want to serve them later, or devour immediately."]
'Mozzarella sticks', ["400g block mozzarella (not in water)","50g flour","2 eggs","150g breadcrumbs","2 tsp smoked paprika","2 tsp dried oregano","vegetable or sunflower oil for frying","dips , to serve"], ["STEP 1","Cut the mozzarella into ‘chips’. Tip the flour into a bowl and season well. Whisk the eggs in a second bowl and tip the breadcrumbs, paprika and oregano into a third. Coat the mozzarella sticks in the flour, then the egg, then the breadcrumbs. Transfer to a parchment-lined tray and freeze for at least 2 hrs.","STEP 2","Heat enough oil to come 2-3cm up the side of a saucepan. When hot, drop in a test chip – it should sizzle straight away and brown within a minute or two. The secret is to cook them long enough to crisp up the outside without letting the mozzarella ooze out – it may take you a few practice chips to get it right. Cook the chips in batches and drain on kitchen paper. Serve hot with your favourite dip."]
'Roast pistachio-stuffed peaches with orange blossom cream', ["6 peaches , halved and pitted","100g pistachios (shelled weight)","½ lemon , finely zested","1 ½ tbsp caster sugar","1 small egg , beaten","3 tsp orange blossom water","250ml apple juice","icing sugar , to serve","250ml double or whipping cream","½ orange , zested","2 tbsp icing sugar (or to taste)","1 tsp orange blossom water"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Put the peach halves in a gratin dish in a single layer without too much space around them (otherwise the apple juice will simply reduce and burn).","STEP 2","Crush the pistachios roughly using a pestle and mortar, then mix in the lemon zest, sugar, egg and 1 tsp orange blossom water. Fill the cavity of each peach with this stuffing, mounding it over the top if you have too much.","STEP 3","Mix the apple juice with the rest of the orange blossom water and pour it around the peaches. Bake for 30-45 mins, depending on ripeness. The peaches should be tender and slightly caramelised on the top.","STEP 4","Whip the cream until it holds its shape, then add the orange zest and sugar, and taste for sweetness. Stir in 1/2 tsp of the orange blossom water and taste. Add more if you like, but be careful not to make the cream too perfumed.","STEP 5","Serve the peaches at room temperature, with a little icing sugar sifted on top, some of the cooking juices spooned around and the cream on the side."]
'Veggie Indian burger', ["2 vegetarian bean burgers","¼ red onion","¼ cucumber","½ large ripe tomato","¼ small bunch  coriander","2 seeded wholemeal  burger buns","2 tbsp raita","2 tbsp mango chutney","20g spicy Bombay mix"], ["STEP 1","Cook the\xa0vegetarian bean burgers following pack instructions. Finely chop the\xa0red onion,\xa0cucumber, tomato and coriander and mix together in a bowl. Lightly toast the burger buns. Divide the raita, burgers, mango chutney, the tomato, onion and cucumber salad and Bombay mix between each bun."]
'Charred nectarine & prosciutto panzanella', ["3 slices sourdough","4 tbsp olive oil","1 tbsp thyme leaves","1 tbsp capers","1⁄2 lemon , juiced","2 tsp Dijon mustard","4-6 ripe nectarines , halved and stoned","bunch of basil","50g sorrel or spinach leaves","handful of chervil","handful of tarragon","2 tbsp ricotta","100g prosciutto","handful of roasted hazelnuts , chopped"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Brush the bread with 1 tbsp of the olive oil and scatter over some sea salt and thyme leaves. Roast for 15 mins, turning once, until crispy and golden. Break up into a bowl and toss with the capers.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, whisk together the lemon juice, 2 tbsp olive oil, a pinch of salt and the mustard to make a dressing, then pour half over the bread.","STEP 3","Heat a grill pan to a high heat and sprinkle in some sea salt. Drizzle the nectarines with the remaining 1 tbsp oil and grill, flesh-side down, until charred. Add to the bowl with the bread, along with the basil, sorrel, chervil and tarragon.","STEP 4","Season and toss everything together, then pile onto a serving platter. Top with the ricotta, prosciutto and hazelnuts, and serve with the remaining dressing on the side, if you like."]
'BBQ chorizo potato salad', ["750g new potatoes , halved if large","4-6 large cooking  chorizo (or 12 small ones)","150ml soured cream","3 tbsp mayonnaise","1 tsp Dijon mustard","1 celery stalk , finely diced (optional)","1 tbsp dill , very finely chopped"], ["STEP 1","Put the potatoes in a pan of cold salted water and bring to the boil. Simmer for 15 mins or until tender and a knife goes in easily. Drain the potatoes and return to the pan, then stand for 5-10 mins to steam-dry. Cut them into bite-sized pieces, season with salt, cover and chill until cold.","STEP 2","Heat the barbecue (or heat a griddle pan if cooking indoors). Halve each large chorizo lengthways and put them, cut-side down, on the barbecue (small chorizo can go on whole). Cook, turning once or twice, until they are crisp around the edges and cooked through. Slice the chorizo into pieces.","STEP 3","Combine the soured cream, mayonnaise and mustard, then add to the cold potatoes with the celery and dill. Gently fold the potatoes into the dressing, taking care not to break up them too much. Scatter the chorizo on top to serve."]
'Slow-roasted courgettes with fennel & orzo', ["pinch of saffron","1⁄2 bulb of fennel , sliced","100g cherry tomatoes , halved","1 bay leaf","2 tbsp olive oil","pinch of dried chilli flakes","120ml dry white wine","4-6 baby to medium-sized courgettes","1 lemon , zested","50g sourdough breadcrumbs","200g orzo","1 tbsp pine nuts , toasted","1 tbsp ricotta","handful of dill"], ["STEP 1","Put the saffron in a small bowl and cover with 1/2 tbsp of boiling water. Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Put the fennel in a roasting tin with the tomatoes and bay leaf, drizzle over some oil, season and toss together with the chilli flakes. Pour over the wine. Prick the courgettes all over with a fork and place on top of the fennel. Drizzle with a little more oil, then season and cover with foil.","STEP 2","Roast for 1 1/2 - 2 hrs, turning the courgettes halfway through, removing the foil for the last 5 mins. The courgettes should be very soft. Lift the courgettes from the pan and set aside.","STEP 3","Meanwhile, heat 1 tbsp olive oil in a frying pan over a medium heat. Add half the lemon zest and breadcrumbs, and gently fry until the bread is golden and crunchy. Set aside.","STEP 4","Cook the orzo in a pan of boiling water until al dente, then drain. Toss with the fennel, tomatoes, pine nuts, the saffron and its water. Season.","STEP 5","Divide the orzo between plates and add half the ricotta to each, drizzle with olive oil and sprinkle with sea salt. Top with the courgettes and scatter over the breadcrumbs, remaining lemon zest and sprigs of dill."]
'Griddled halloumi with watermelon & caper breadcrumbs', ["750g watermelon","2 small shallots , very finely sliced","100ml extra virgin olive oil , plus extra for brushing and to serve","4 tsp white balsamic vinegar","300g halloumi , sliced","good squeeze of lemon juice","75g slightly stale country bread , crusts removed, blitzed into coarse breadcrumbs","1-2 cloves garlic , finely chopped","½ medium red chilli , halved, deseeded and chopped","2½ tbsp capers , rinsed","50g blanched almonds , toasted and chopped","small bunch of mint , leaves picked, half of them torn"], ["STEP 1","Cut the watermelon into either cubes or slices and transfer to a bowl with the shallots. Add 4 tbsp extra virgin olive oil and the balsamic, then season with fresh black pepper. Cover and put in the fridge for about 15-20 mins.","STEP 2","Heat the remaining oil in a frying pan. Fry the breadcrumbs until turning gold. Add the garlic, chilli and capers and cook for another minute, then toss in the almonds. Remove from the heat, add the torn mint (it will wilt a little), then taste – it will be quite salty, but the watermelon won’t be, so you’ll get a good contrast.","STEP 3","Brush the halloumi with a little oil and heat a griddle pan. Griddle the cheese on both sides until just starting to melt but still holding its shape, with nice golden griddle marks. Toss the cold watermelon and shallots with the rest of the mint leaves and some salt. Divide between four plates, or pile onto a platter. Put the hot halloumi on top. Squeeze over some lemon juice and top with some of the breadcrumb and caper mix. Serve immediately."]
'Chipotle gazpacho', ["1kg ripe tomatoes , roughly chopped","1 large red pepper , deseeded and roughly chopped","½ cucumber , sliced","4 spring onions , finely sliced","1 small garlic clove , grated","40g blanched almonds , roughly chopped","3 limes , juiced","2 tbsp olive oil","2 tsp chipotle paste","1 large, ripe avocado , cubed","1 small red chilli , deseeded and finely chopped","½ small bunch coriander , finely chopped"], ["STEP 1","Put the tomatoes, pepper, cucumber, two of the spring onions, the garlic, half the almonds, half\xa0the lime juice, and all the olive oil and chipotle paste into a blender. Whizz until almost smooth. Pour into a jug and chill for at least 2 hrs.","STEP 2","When ready to eat, toss the remaining spring onion, avocado, chilli and coriander with the remaining lime juice. Ladle the soup into four bowls and top with the avocado salsa and reserved almonds."]
'BBQ chorizo potato salad', ["750g new potatoes , halved if large","4-6 large cooking  chorizo (or 12 small ones)","150ml soured cream","3 tbsp mayonnaise","1 tsp Dijon mustard","1 celery stalk , finely diced (optional)","1 tbsp dill , very finely chopped"], ["STEP 1","Put the potatoes in a pan of cold salted water and bring to the boil. Simmer for 15 mins or until tender and a knife goes in easily. Drain the potatoes and return to the pan, then stand for 5-10 mins to steam-dry. Cut them into bite-sized pieces, season with salt, cover and chill until cold.","STEP 2","Heat the barbecue (or heat a griddle pan if cooking indoors). Halve each large chorizo lengthways and put them, cut-side down, on the barbecue (small chorizo can go on whole). Cook, turning once or twice, until they are crisp around the edges and cooked through. Slice the chorizo into pieces.","STEP 3","Combine the soured cream, mayonnaise and mustard, then add to the cold potatoes with the celery and dill. Gently fold the potatoes into the dressing, taking care not to break up them too much. Scatter the chorizo on top to serve."]
'Roast side of salmon with chermoula', ["850g side of salmon","3 tbsp olive oil","1 tsp coriander seeds","1 tsp cumin seeds","½ small pack mint , leaves picked","½ small pack coriander","small handful tarragon","1 lemon , zested and juiced","1 fat garlic clove","½ tsp chilli flakes"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Line the bottom of a roasting tin that’s large enough to fit the salmon in with baking parchment. Brush ½ tbsp oil over the skin and season all over. Place skin-side down in the tin and roast for 15-20 mins until the salmon is just cooked through.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, toast the coriander and cumin seeds in a dry frying pan. Tip into a blender and add all the remaining ingredients. Blitz to a smooth green sauce, adding enough water to get a drizzling consistency. Season to taste. The chermoula can be made in the morning and kept chilled in the fridge. Put the salmon on a serving platter and drizzle over a little chermoula, with the rest on the side to serve."]
'Summer berry cake with rose geranium cream', ["325g butter , at room temperature, plus extra for the tins","425g caster sugar","2 tsp almond extract","½ lemon , finely zested","250g plain yogurt","4 large eggs , at room temperature","375g self-raising flour","225g ground almonds","200g mascarpone","300ml double cream","1 tbsp lemon juice","icing sugar , to taste, plus extra for dusting","1-2 tsp rose geranium water or rose water, to taste (see tip, below)","800g summer berries (raspberries, blackberries, redcurrants, blackcurrants, hulled strawberries and loganberries)","4 tbsp caster sugar","rose geranium flowers or other edible flowers"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Butter and line the bases of three 23cm cake tins. Cream the butter and sugar until light and fluffy, then add the almond extract and lemon zest. Use a fork to whisk the yogurt with the eggs. With the mixer on a low speed, add the flour, ground almonds and 1/2 tsp salt to the butter and sugar, alternating with the yogurt and eggs.","STEP 2","Divide the batter between the tins and bake for 35-40 mins or until a skewer inserted into the middle comes out clean. Cool in the tins for 5 mins, then turn out onto a wire rack, remove the parchment and leave to cool.","STEP 3","Beat the mascarpone to loosen it. Whip the cream until it holds its shape. Combine the cream, mascarpone and lemon juice, then carefully add the icing sugar and flower water to taste.","STEP 4","Assemble the cake just before serving. Toss the berries with the caster sugar. Spread the flattest cake with half the cream, then add half the fruit. Top with a second cake, spread with the rest of the cream and top with the rest of the fruit. Finish with the last cake, sift over icing sugar, then decorate with rose geranium petals and rose geranium leaves (as long as they’re small)."]
'Fennel, roast lemon & tomato salad', ["2 lemons","2 tbsp extra virgin olive oil","pinch of sugar","500g mixed tomatoes (I used cherry tomatoes and some larger ones)","3 fennel bulbs","100g pomegranate seeds","1⁄2 small pack tarragon leaves","1⁄2 small pack parsley leaves","1⁄2 small pack mint leaves"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6 and line a baking tray with baking parchment. Slice 1 lemon into thin rounds and spread out on the baking tray, drizzle over 1/2 tbsp oil and sprinkle over the sugar. Roast for 20-25 mins until shrivelled and caramelised in places. Keep an eye on them – you may have to take some out the oven before the others are done. These can be made in the morning and kept at room temperature.","STEP 2","While the lemons are cooking, roughly chop the tomatoes and thinly slice the fennel, saving the fronds. Put in a bowl with the remaining olive oil, juice from the other lemon and pomegranate seeds. Season to taste, then give everything a good mix.","STEP 3","When you’re ready to serve, roughly chop all the herbs and mix them into the salad along with the roasted lemons and fennel fronds."]
'Apricot & pistachio frangipane blondies', ["100g unsalted butter , melted, plus a little extra for the tin","200g light muscovado sugar","½ tsp fennel seeds","1 large egg","120g plain flour","50g pistachios , roughly chopped","1-2 tbsp milk","6 large ripe apricots , halved and stoned","65g golden caster sugar","80g unsalted butter , softened","1 egg","100g pistachios , ground to crumbs"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6 and butter and line a rectangular baking tin, approx 20 x 25cm. To make the frangipane, beat together the sugar and butter until fluffy, then add the egg and pistachios.","STEP 2","In a bowl, stir together the muscovado sugar, fennel seeds and melted butter with a pinch of salt. Add the egg and stir vigorously, then tip in the flour and half the pistachios and fold until well combined and no streaks remain. Add the milk to loosen.","STEP 3","Spoon two-thirds of the batter into the tin and smooth with the back of a metal spoon or spatula, then arrange the apricot halves on top and press into the batter. Dot the frangipane around the batter too, then top with the remaining spoonfuls of batter so that it’s part covering the frangipane and apricots. Scatter over the rest of the pistachios. Bake for 25-30 mins until a skewer comes out with some crumbs that are a little moist, but not raw. Cool completely in the tin, then cut into 12 squares."]
'Grilled steak salad with horseradish dressing', ["250g/9oz bavette or skirt steak","1 tsp celery seeds, crushed","1 tbsp Worcestershire sauce","little olive oil , for brushing","6 celery sticks, thinly sliced, leaves reserved","200g mixed tomato , sliced or halved (beefsteak, plum and red and yellow cherry are all good)","1 tbsp Worcestershire sauce","1 tbsp olive oil","1 tsp horseradish sauce","1 tsp red wine vinegar","1 tsp tomato purée"], ["STEP 1","Rub the steak on both sides with the crushed celery seeds, some seasoning and the Worcestershire sauce. Brush with olive oil and leave to marinate while you prepare the salad.","STEP 2","Mix the dressing ingredients in a small bowl. Divide the celery and tomatoes between 2 plates. Heat a griddle pan over a high heat, then cook the meat for 2-3 mins on each side (depending on how thick your steaks are). Remove from the heat and leave to rest, covered with foil, for 5 mins.","STEP 3","Slice the steaks and place on top of the salads, pour the dressing over and scatter over the celery leaves."]
'Frozen margarita', ["50ml tequila","25ml triple sec (we used Cointreau)","25ml lime juice","15ml sugar syrup (see \'Goes well with\' below)","large handful of ice","wedge of lime , to garnish"], ["STEP 1","Put all the ingredients except the lime wedge in a blender and blitz until smooth. Tip into a cocktail, margarita or rocks glass, garnish and serve."]
'Halloumi & quinoa fattoush', ["2 brown pittas , torn into pieces","5 tbsp olive oil","2 lemons , juiced","1 garlic clove , crushed","250g block halloumi , sliced","250g microwavable pouch  quinoa","350g medium  tomatoes , quartered","1 large  cucumber , halved, deseeded and sliced","4 spring onions , sliced","½ small bunch  mint , chopped","½ small bunch  dill , roughly chopped"], ["STEP 1","Heat the grill to high. Toss the pitta pieces with 1 tbsp oil and spread out onto a baking sheet. Grill for 3-4 mins, turning halfway, until golden and crisp. Set aside to cool.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, whisk together the remaining oil with the lemon juice and garlic, then season. Heat a large griddle pan or non-stick frying pan over a high heat and cook the halloumi for 1-2 mins on each side or until lightly charred.","STEP 3","Cook the quinoa following pack instructions, leave to cool, then toss with the tomatoes, cucumber, spring onion, most of the fresh herbs and the dressing. Season to taste. Tip onto a serving plate and top with the halloumi, pitta and remaining herbs."]
'Sweet potatoes with red pepper & halloumi', ["4 medium sweet potatoes","1 tbsp olive oil","8 mint leaves , finely chopped","225g halloumi , cut into 4 slices","4 fat strips grilled red pepper","butter (optional)","1 lemon , halved","small bunch parsley , chopped"], ["STEP 1","Rub each potato with a little oil and salt, then wrap in a double layer of foil.","STEP 2","Pour the oil into a bowl and stir in the mint. Add the halloumi and toss until well coated in the minty oil. Wrap each piece in a strip of pepper. Cut four lengths of foil about 1cm wide and wrap one around the middle of each parcel to hold them together. You could use skewers instead, but be careful not to split the cheese.","STEP 3","Heat the barbecue. When the coals glow red, put the potatoes directly on them. Cook for 30 mins, turning halfway. Unwrap a potato and check if it is cooked through. If not, rewrap and cook more, checking every 10 mins. Alternatively, bake in the oven at 200C/180C fan/gas 6 for 50 mins-1 hr.","STEP 4","Meanwhile cook the pepper parcels on the barbecue or a griddle pan for 3-4 mins each side or until the pepper chars and the cheese melts a bit. Remove from the grill and unwind the foil or remove the skewers. Split the potatoes, add butter if you like, then lay a parcel in the centre of each. Add a squeeze of lemon and scatter over some parsley to serve."]
'Veggie Indian burger', ["2 vegetarian bean burgers","¼ red onion","¼ cucumber","½ large ripe tomato","¼ small bunch  coriander","2 seeded wholemeal  burger buns","2 tbsp raita","2 tbsp mango chutney","20g spicy Bombay mix"], ["STEP 1","Cook the\xa0vegetarian bean burgers following pack instructions. Finely chop the\xa0red onion,\xa0cucumber, tomato and coriander and mix together in a bowl. Lightly toast the burger buns. Divide the raita, burgers, mango chutney, the tomato, onion and cucumber salad and Bombay mix between each bun."]
'Easy cornflake tart', ["320g ready-rolled shortcrust pastry","plain flour, to dust","50g butter","125g golden syrup","25g light brown soft sugar","100g cornflakes","125g strawberry or raspberry jam","custard, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Unroll the pastry and briefly\xa0roll out\xa0on a lightly floured work surface\xa0until it\'s large enough\xa0to fit a 23cm loose-bottomed tart tin. Use the rolling pin to lift the pastry over the tin, then press into the corners and sides so the excess pastry hangs over the rim. Trim this away, leaving just a small amount of excess hanging over the rim.","STEP 2","Line the pastry with baking parchment\xa0and fill with baking beans or uncooked rice. Bake for 15 mins. Remove the parchment and beans, then bake for another 5-10 mins until just golden. Remove from the oven and trim any excess pastry from the edges using\xa0a serrated knife.","STEP 3","Heat the butter, syrup and sugar in a small pan with a pinch of salt, stirring frequently, until melted and smooth. Fold in the cornflakes to coat in the butter mixture.","STEP 4","Spoon the jam into the cooked pastry base, then level the surface.\xa0Tip\xa0the cornflake mixture over the jam and gently press down until all of the jam is covered with a layer of the mixture.\xa0Return the tart to the oven and bake\xa0for another 5 mins until the cornflakes are golden and toasted. Leave to cool until just warm\xa0before slicing\xa0and serving with custard."]
'Easy vanilla cupcakes', ["110g butter , softened","110g golden caster sugar","2 eggs","1 tsp vanilla extract","110g self-raising flour","1-2 tbsp milk , plus a little extra for the icing","125g butter , softened","185g icing sugar"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Line 12 holes in a shallow muffin tin with cupcake cases (not muffin cases). Cream the butter and sugar together until the mixture is light and fluffy. Beat the eggs and vanilla in a jug, then beat into the butter mixture a little at a time.","STEP 2","Fold the flour into the mixture along with a little milk – the mixture should fall easily off a spoon. Divide the mixture between the cases, filling each one no more than half full.","STEP 3","Cook the cakes for 12-15 mins – they should be firm to the touch and slightly golden brown. Cool in the tin for 5 mins, then lift them out gently and leave to cool completely.","STEP 4","To make the icing, beat the butter until it is very soft. Beat in the icing sugar a little at a time, then beat in a splash of the milk as you need to give you a soft icing that can be piped easily. Scrape the icing into an icing bag fitted with a star nozzle. Ice the cakes in swirls, starting in the centre and working outwards."]
'Roast pistachio-stuffed peaches with orange blossom cream', ["6 peaches , halved and pitted","100g pistachios (shelled weight)","½ lemon , finely zested","1 ½ tbsp caster sugar","1 small egg , beaten","3 tsp orange blossom water","250ml apple juice","icing sugar , to serve","250ml double or whipping cream","½ orange , zested","2 tbsp icing sugar (or to taste)","1 tsp orange blossom water"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Put the peach halves in a gratin dish in a single layer without too much space around them (otherwise the apple juice will simply reduce and burn).","STEP 2","Crush the pistachios roughly using a pestle and mortar, then mix in the lemon zest, sugar, egg and 1 tsp orange blossom water. Fill the cavity of each peach with this stuffing, mounding it over the top if you have too much.","STEP 3","Mix the apple juice with the rest of the orange blossom water and pour it around the peaches. Bake for 30-45 mins, depending on ripeness. The peaches should be tender and slightly caramelised on the top.","STEP 4","Whip the cream until it holds its shape, then add the orange zest and sugar, and taste for sweetness. Stir in 1/2 tsp of the orange blossom water and taste. Add more if you like, but be careful not to make the cream too perfumed.","STEP 5","Serve the peaches at room temperature, with a little icing sugar sifted on top, some of the cooking juices spooned around and the cream on the side."]
'Choc hazelnut ice cream sandwich', ["2 scoops chocolate & salted caramel ice cream , softened","4 double chocolate cookies","2 handfuls hazelnuts , roasted and chopped"], ["STEP 1","Put a scoop of ice cream on 2 cookies, then top with 2 more cookies and squish down a bit so the ice cream reaches the edges.","STEP 2","Put the hazelnuts on a plate. Roll the sides of each ice cream sandwich through the nuts, like a wheel, to create a nutty edge, then either pop in the freezer if you want to serve them later, or devour immediately."]
'Spiced hummingbird cake', ["225ml vegetable oil , plus extra for the tins","300g self-raising flour","½ tsp baking powder","300g golden caster sugar","1 tsp ground cinnamon","2 cardamom pods , cracked open and seeds finely crushed","whole nutmeg , for grating","2 very ripe bananas , mashed","3 medium eggs , beaten","150g pineapple chunks , from a can, drained and chopped","80g pecans , finely chopped","200g full-fat soft cheese","150g softened, unsalted butter","80g runny honey","80g icing sugar","1 large orange , zested","edible flowers and dried pineapple rings, to decorate (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Oil two 20cm, loose-bottomed cake tins and line the bottom of each one with baking parchment.","STEP 2","Sieve the flour into a large mixing bowl, and add 1/2 tsp salt and the baking powder. Stir through the sugar, cinnamon, cardamom and a very good grating of nutmeg. In a separate bowl, whisk the mashed bananas through the eggs and oil until well combined. Make a well in the centre of the dry ingredients and tip in the wet mixture. Fold everything together until combined, then mix through the pineapple and pecans. Spoon the mixture into the tins and bake in the centre of the oven for 35-45 mins or until a skewer inserted into the middle comes out clean. Leave to cool in the tins for about 10 mins before transferring to a wire rack to cool down completely.","STEP 3","Meanwhile, put the soft cheese, softened butter, honey and sugar into a mixing bowl and beat together until just combined. Try not to overbeat the mixture or it will become too soft and runny. Chill for 30 mins in the fridge before using.","STEP 4","Put one of the cakes on a serving plate and spread with half the icing. Top with the other cake and smooth over the remaining icing. Finish with shavings of orange zest, edible flowers and dried pineapple rings, if you like. Will keep in an airtight container for up to three days."]
'Grilled steak salad with horseradish dressing', ["250g/9oz bavette or skirt steak","1 tsp celery seeds, crushed","1 tbsp Worcestershire sauce","little olive oil , for brushing","6 celery sticks, thinly sliced, leaves reserved","200g mixed tomato , sliced or halved (beefsteak, plum and red and yellow cherry are all good)","1 tbsp Worcestershire sauce","1 tbsp olive oil","1 tsp horseradish sauce","1 tsp red wine vinegar","1 tsp tomato purée"], ["STEP 1","Rub the steak on both sides with the crushed celery seeds, some seasoning and the Worcestershire sauce. Brush with olive oil and leave to marinate while you prepare the salad.","STEP 2","Mix the dressing ingredients in a small bowl. Divide the celery and tomatoes between 2 plates. Heat a griddle pan over a high heat, then cook the meat for 2-3 mins on each side (depending on how thick your steaks are). Remove from the heat and leave to rest, covered with foil, for 5 mins.","STEP 3","Slice the steaks and place on top of the salads, pour the dressing over and scatter over the celery leaves."]
'Smashed cannellini bean tartine', ["400g can cannellini beans , drained and rinsed","2 tbsp rapeseed oil","1 large lemon , zested and juiced","1 small garlic clove , finely grated","1 small red chilli , deseeded and finely chopped","1⁄2 small bunch parsley , finely chopped","8 cherry tomatoes , halved","2 slices sourdough","15g feta , crumbled","50g rocket"], ["STEP 1","Put the beans, 1 tbsp of the oil, the lemon zest and juice and the garlic in a food processor and blitz to create a chunky texture. Transfer to a bowl and stir through the chilli, parsley and cherry tomatoes.","STEP 2","Lightly toast the bread and pile on the cannellini bean smash, scatter over the feta and drizzle with the remaining oil. Serve with the rocket on the side."]
'Peach & orange yogurt pots with ginger oats', ["4 peaches or nectarines, stoned and diced","1 orange , juiced and zested","120g porridge oats","25g pine nuts","½ tsp ground ginger","1 tsp ground cinnamon","2 tbsp sultanas","4 x 150ml pots bio yogurt"], ["STEP 1","Put the peaches and orange juice in a small pan. Put the lid on and cook gently for 3-5 mins, depending on their ripeness, until softened. Set aside to cool.","STEP 2","Tip the oats and pine nuts into a pan and heat gently, stirring frequently until they’re just starting to toast. Turn off the heat and add the spices, zest and sultanas.","STEP 3","Spoon the peaches and juices into four tumblers and top with the yogurt. Cover and chill until needed. Keep the oat mixture in an airtight container. When ready to serve, top the peaches and yogurt with the oat mixture."]
'Rustic beans & spinach with garlic yogurt', ["2 tbsp rapeseed oil","1 large onion , halved and sliced","170g carrots , cut into small chunks","5 garlic cloves , 3 finely sliced and 2 crushed","1 tbsp sherry vinegar","1 red pepper , deseeded and chopped","½ tsp vegetable bouillon powder , made up to 250ml with boiling water","2 rosemary sprigs","1 tbsp smoked paprika , plus a pinch to serve","150g whole cherry tomatoes","1 ½ tbsp tomato purée","400g and 210g cans butter beans , drained","2 x 120g pots bio yogurt","160g baby spinach","squeeze lemon (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a large pan and fry the onion, carrots and sliced garlic, stirring frequently for 10 mins until the veg starts to caramelise. Pour in the sherry vinegar, allowing it to sizzle in the heat, then add the pepper, bouillon, rosemary, paprika, cherry tomatoes, tomato purée and beans, and cook for 15 mins. Meanwhile, stir the yogurt and crushed garlic together.","STEP 2","Stir the spinach into the pan and cook until wilted, adding a splash of water if you need to. Add some lemon juice to taste if you like, then serve in bowls topped with a dollop of the yogurt, a pinch of paprika and a good grinding of black pepper."]
'Veggie rainbow picnic pie', ["450g butternut squash , peeled, sliced and cut into small chunks","2 tbsp olive or rapeseed oil","1 large onion , sliced","550g small waxy potatoes , peeled and sliced","2 x 375g blocks all-butter puff pastry","flour , for dusting","1 x 320g ready-rolled sheet all-butter puff pastry","2 tbsp breadcrumbs","300g pack cooked beetroot , sliced","450g jar roasted red peppers , drained","200g block feta cheese","150g frozen peas","small bunch each parsley and mint, chopped","10 eggs","2 tbsp sesame seeds"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Toss the squash in 1 tbsp oil and some seasoning and roast for 20 mins until soft. Meanwhile, fry the onion in the remaining oil for 10-15 mins over a low heat until golden and boil the potatoes for 8 mins until soft. Drain the potatoes and leave the veg to cool.","STEP 2","Reduce oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Line a 20cm x 30cm baking tin with a long double thickness strip of parchment (this will help you to lift out the pie once cooked). Squeeze the two blocks of pastry together, then roll out on a floured surface – the pastry should be about the thickness of a £1 coin. Use the pastry to line the tin, leaving any excess pastry hanging over the edges.","STEP 3","Sprinkle the breadcrumbs over the base of the pastry. Layer in the beetroot slices, peppers, squash, onions, feta, potatoes, peas and herbs (in that order for a nice rainbow effect), seasoning well between each layer. Beat the eggs and pour slowly over the filling until most of it has sunk through the layers, saving a little to glaze the top. Brush some egg over the overhanging pastry then lay the rolled pastry sheet on top. Press the pastry sheets together, then use some kitchen scissors to trim the excess pastry, leaving about 2cm. Roll the edges in to seal, then press them firmly with a fork. Brush with egg, sprinkle with seeds, then use the fork prongs to mark out 12 portions. Bake for 1 hr 20 mins until the pastry is golden and crisp. Leave to cool completely before slicing, or chill for up to two days before serving."]
'Rhubarb & custard crunch', ["450g rhubarb , trimmed and cut into chunks","85g caster sugar","roughly a 500g/1lb 2oz tub or can ready-made custard","½ quantity honey crunch granola (see \'Goes well with\')"], ["STEP 1","First make the Honey crunch granola with almonds & apricots (see \'Goes well with\'). You\'ll need half the granola for this recipe.","STEP 2","Heat oven to 150C/130C fan/gas 2. Arrange the rhubarb in a roasting tin just big enough to hold it all in a single layer, scatter with the sugar and cover with foil. Bake for 15-20 mins until just tender, then cool in the tin.","STEP 3","Spoon a little rhubarb into the base of 6 glasses or pots, then top with a couple of tbsp custard. Sprinkle over some granola, then repeat the layers to fill the glasses."]
'Spiced lentil & butternut squash soup', ["2 tbsp olive oil","2 onions, finely chopped","2 garlic cloves, crushed","¼ tsp hot chilli powder","1 tbsp ras el hanout","1 butternut squash, peeled and cut into 2cm pieces","100g red lentils","1l hot vegetable stock","1 small bunch coriander, leaves chopped, plus extra to serve","dukkah (see tip) and natural yogurt, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a large flameproof casserole dish or saucepan over a medium-high heat. Fry the onions with a pinch of salt for 7 mins, or until softened and just caramelised. Add the garlic, chilli and ras el hanout, and cook for 1 min more.","STEP 2","Stir in the squash and lentils. Pour over the stock and season to taste. Bring to the boil, then reduce the heat to a simmer and cook, covered, for 25 mins or until the squash is soft. Blitz the soup with a stick blender until smooth, then season to taste. To freeze, leave to cool completely and transfer to large freezerproof bags.","STEP 3","Stir in the coriander leaves and ladle the soup into bowls. Serve topped with the dukkah, yogurt\xa0and extra coriander leaves."]
'Carrot cake', ["175g light muscovado sugar","175ml sunflower oil","3 large eggs, lightly beaten","140g grated carrot (about 3 medium)","100g raisins","1 large orange, zested","175g self-raising flour","1 tsp bicarbonate of soda","1 tsp ground cinnamon","½ tsp grated nutmeg (freshly grated will give you the best flavour)","175g icing sugar","1½-2 tbsp orange juice"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Oil and line the base and sides of an 18cm square cake tin with baking parchment.","STEP 2","Tip the sugar, sunflower oil and eggs into a big mixing bowl. Lightly mix with a wooden spoon. Stir in the carrots, raisins and orange zest.","STEP 3","Sift the flour, bicarbonate of soda, cinnamon and nutmeg into the bowl. Mix everything together, the mixture will be soft and almost runny.","STEP 4","Pour the mixture into the prepared tin and bake for 40-45 mins or until it feels firm and springy when you press it in the centre.","STEP 5","Cool in the tin for 5 mins, then turn it out, peel off the paper and cool on a wire rack. (You can freeze the cake at this point\xa0if you want to serve it at a later date.)","STEP 6","Beat the icing sugar and orange juice in a small bowl until smooth – you want the icing about as runny as single cream. Put the cake on a serving plate and boldly drizzle the icing back and forth in diagonal lines over the top, letting it drip down the sides."]
'Honey crunch granola with almonds & apricots', ["200g clear honey","4 tbsp mild-flavoured oil , such as sunflower or rapeseed","300g rolled oats","100g whole unblanched almonds","1 tsp ground cinnamon","140g dried apricots , roughly chopped"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. In a large pan, heat the honey and oil together until bubbling, then tip in the oats, almonds and cinnamon. Stir well until the oats are well coated, then tip onto 1-2 large baking sheets, spreading the mixture out. Bake for 20-25 mins, stirring halfway, until golden.","STEP 2","Remove from the oven and, while still hot, stir in the apricots. Spread out again and press down with a spatula to cool – this will help it to clump together. Once cool, serve with yogurt or milk, and fruit, if you like. Will keep in an airtight container for 3 weeks. See \'Goes well with\' for recipes using your granola."]
'Faggots with onion gravy', ["little oil, for the tin","170g pack sage & onion stuffing mix (we used Paxo)","500g pack diced pork shoulder","300g pig liver","½ tsp ground mace","2 onions, thinly sliced","1 tbsp sunflower oil","2 tsp sugar","1 tbsp red wine vinegar","3 tbsp plain flour","850ml beef stock","handful chopped parsley","mash and veg, to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 160C/140C fan/gas 3. Lightly oil a very large roasting tin. Tip the stuffing mix into a large bowl, add 500ml boiling water, stir and set aside.","STEP 2","Pulse the pork in a food processor until finely chopped. Add the liver and pulse again. Add to the stuffing with the mace, 1 tsp salt and plenty of black pepper. Stir well. Shape the mixture (it will be very soft) into 24 large faggots and put in the prepared tin.","STEP 3","To make the gravy, fry the onions in the oil until starting to turn golden. Add the sugar and continue cooking, stirring frequently, until caramelised. Tip in the vinegar and allow to sizzle. Mix the flour with a couple of tbsp water. Pour the stock into the onions, then add the flour paste and cook, stirring constantly, until smooth and starting to thicken. When it is thick, pour into the tin with the faggots, cover with foil and bake for 1 hr until cooked through. Serve sprinkled with parsley, with mash and a veg, if you like."]
'Chocolate flapjacks', ["50g butter","50g clear honey","½ quantity honey crunch granola (see \'Goes well with\')","100g plain chocolate , half chopped into small chunks, half melted"], ["STEP 1","First make the Honey crunch granola with almonds & apricots (see \'Goes well with\'). You\'ll need half the granola for this recipe.","STEP 2","Heat oven to 190C/170C fan/gas 5 and line a baking tin (15 x 20cm, or 18cm square) with baking parchment. Melt the butter and honey together in a large pan. Stir in the granola and chocolate chunks, making sure they are all well coated.","STEP 3","Tip the flapjack mix into the tin and press down very firmly (a potato masher is a good tool to use here). Cover with foil or more baking parchment, then bake for 25-30 mins. Leave to cool in the tin, then drizzle over the melted chocolate. Once set, cut into 8 portions. Can be stored in an airtight container for 3 days."]
'Chicken biryani bake', ["1 tbsp olive oil","4 skinless chicken breasts , chopped into chunks","4 skinless, boneless chicken thighs , chopped into chunks","2 onions , sliced","4 tbsp curry paste (we used korma and tikka masala)","300g cauliflower , chopped into small florets","700ml chicken stock","400g can chopped tomato","400g can chickpea , rinsed and drained","200g natural yogurt","300g spinach","400g basmati rice , cooked following pack instructions","5 tbsp flaked almond"], ["STEP 1","Start by making the curry. Heat 1 tbsp of the oil in a large, deep frying pan. Season the chicken and fry until browned, then remove and set aside. Fry the onion in the rest of the oil for 10-12 mins until soft and starting to caramelise.","STEP 2","Add the paste and cauliflower, stirring to coat everything, then return the chicken. Pour in the stock, tomatoes and chickpeas and simmer everything for 30 mins until the cauliflower is nearly tender. There should be just enough liquid to cover everything so add a splash more water or stock if you need to. Remove from the heat and stir in the yogurt.","STEP 3","Assemble the bake in either 1 large or 2 smaller, deep ovenproof dishes. Start with a ¹/³ of the spinach leaves, season, then top with a ¹/³ of the curry. Finish with a ¹/³ of the rice then repeat twice more. Scatter on the almonds and either cool completely to freeze, or heat oven to 220C/200C fan/gas 7 and cook for 20-25 mins until the topping has crisped up and the dish is piping hot through."]
'Melanzane lasagne', ["3 aubergines , sliced lengthways","2 tbsp olive oil","3 large garlic cloves , crushed","680ml jar passata","½ tbsp dried oregano","1 tsp sugar","1 tbsp red wine vinegar","small bunch basil leaves , torn","100g parmesan , or vegetarian alternative, grated","125g ball mozzarella , torn","200g fresh lasagne sheets","5 tbsp breadcrumb"], ["STEP 1","Heat grill to high. Arrange the aubergine slices on a baking sheet, brush with oil and season well. Grill for 2-3 mins each side until golden brown, set aside.","STEP 2","Heat oil in a saucepan. Fry the garlic for 1 min then pour in the passata. Simmer for 10 mins with the oregano, sugar and vinegar, then season and stir in the basil.","STEP 3","Assemble the lasagne in a roughly A4-sized baking dish. Spread a few tbsp of the tomato sauce over the base of the dish, followed by a layer of aubergine. Scatter over some Parmesan and mozzarella, then cover with a layer of lasagne. Repeat, finishing with a topping of Parmesan and mozzarella, and sprinkle on the breadcrumbs.","STEP 4","Allow to cool at this point for freezing, or heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6 and cook the lasagne for 25-30 mins until golden and bubbling."]
'Pappardelle with beef', ["½ quantity beef with red wine & carrots (see \'Goes well with\')","400g can chopped tomato","500g pappardelle pasta","grated parmesan , to serve"], ["STEP 1","First make the Beef with red wine & carrots (see \'Goes well with\'). You will need half the finished stew for this recipe.","STEP 2","Put the stew in a large pan and use 2 forks to roughly shred the beef. Add the tomatoes, bring to a simmer, then gently cook for 15 mins. Meanwhile, cook the pasta.","STEP 3","Spoon some sauce onto each portion of pasta, or stir through and top with Parmesan to serve."]
'Cinnamon pancakes with compote & maple syrup', ["140g self-raising flour","1 tsp ground cinnamon","3 tbsp muscovado sugar or brown sugar","1 large egg","300ml milk","1 tsp vanilla extract","2 tbsp melted butter , plus extra for frying","½ quantity apple , pear & cherry compote, to serve (see \'Goes well with\')"], ["STEP 1","First make the Apple, pear & cherry compote (see \'Goes well with\'). You\'ll need half the compote for this recipe.","STEP 2","In a large bowl, whisk together the flour, cinnamon, sugar and ½ tsp salt. In a jug, whisk the egg, milk, vanilla and melted butter. Make a well in the dry ingredients and pour in the milk mixture gradually, whisking as you go to make a smooth batter. Ideally, let the mixture stand for 1 hr (or even overnight, covered in the fridge), although you can cook with it straight away.","STEP 3","Heat a non-stick frying pan over a medium-high heat. Melt a knob of butter, then drop in tbsps of the mixture to make pancakes about 10cm across. Cook for 2-3 mins until bubbles appear on the surface, then flip over and cook for 1 min more. Keep each batch warm while you use up the rest of the batter. Stack up the pancakes and serve with hot or cold compote, maple syrup and yogurt."]
'Slow cooker ratatouille', ["2 tbsp olive oil","1 red onion , sliced","2 garlic cloves","2 large aubergines , cut into 1.5cm pieces","3 courgettes , halved and cut into 2cm pieces","3 mixed peppers , cut into 2cm pieces","1 tbsp tomato purée","6 large ripe tomatoes , roughly chopped","small bunch of basil , roughly chopped, plus a few extra leaves to serve","few thyme sprigs","400g can plum tomatoes","1 tbsp red wine vinegar","1 tsp brown sugar","sourdough , to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a large frying pan and fry the onion for 8 mins until\xa0translucent. Add the garlic and fry for 1 min. Turn the heat to medium-high, add the aubergines and fry for 5 mins until golden. Stir in the courgettes and peppers and fry for 5 mins more until slightly soft. Add the tomato purée, fresh tomatoes, herbs, canned tomatoes, vinegar, sugar and 1 tsp salt and bring to the boil.","STEP 2","Transfer to the slow cooker and cook on low for 5-6 hours or until everything is soft and the sauce has thickened. Season, scatter over some extra basil, and serve with sourdough, if you like."]
'Cheeseburger & chips', ["1 ¼kg lean beef mince","1 onion , finely chopped","140g breadcrumb","100g mature  cheddar , grated","small bunch parsley , chopped","1 tbsp Worcestershire sauce","1 egg , lightly beaten with a fork","1 tsp mild chilli powder","2 ½kg bag of  potato , cut into chunky chips","3 tbsp plain flour","10 tsp olive or  sunflower oil","burger buns , lettuce, sliced red onion, tomatoes, gherkins, and sauces or relishes, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Tip the mince into a large bowl with the onion, breadcrumbs, cheese, parsley, Worcestershire sauce, egg, chilli powder, ½ tsp salt and some pepper. Mix together well with your hands, then divide the mixture into 10 and shape into burgers.","STEP 2","Bring 2 large saucepans of water to the boil (or prepare the chips in batches if you don’t have enough big pans). Add the chips, bring the water back to the boil and set your timer for 3 mins. After 3 mins, drain the potatoes well and tip onto one or two large kitchen-papercovered trays. Scatter with the flour and some seasoning and gently toss to coat.","STEP 3","Freeze the burgers and chips (see freezing tips, below) or, to cook straight away, heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. In a baking tray, toss the chips in a little oil, then roast for 35-40 mins until crisp and golden. Meanwhile, heat a griddle pan, grill or barbecue until hot, then cook the burgers for about 5-8 mins on each side, or until cooked to your liking. Sandwich the burgers in toasted buns with salad and sauces, then serve with the chips."]
'Slow cooker beef bourguignon', ["3 tbsp vegetable oil","1 ½kg stewing or braising steak, cut into small chunks","2 large onions, chopped","2 carrots, chopped","2 celery stalks, chopped","2 bay leaves","2 thyme sprigs or rosemary sprigs","3 tbsp plain flour","750ml bottle red wine","1 beef stock cube","1 tsp caster sugar","2 tbsp tomato purée","100g unsmoked bacon lardons","6 small shallots or baby onions, halved or quartered","300g closed cup mushrooms, halved or quartered","mashed potatoes or crusty bread, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Turn the slow cooker to low and heat 2 tbsp of the oil in a large frying pan. Season the meat and fry for 3-4 mins in batches until browned all over, scooping out each batch with a slotted spoon and transferring the browned meat to a plate.","STEP 2","Tip the onion, carrot and celery into the pan and fry for 5-10 mins until soft. Add the herbs and flour and cook for another 2 mins. Pour a splash of the wine into a bowl, then add the stock cube, sugar and tomato purée and mix to form a paste. Scrape the paste into the onion mix and pour in the remaining wine. Bring the mixture to a bubble, then transfer to the slow cooker. Stir in the browned beef, topping up with a splash of water to cover the meat if needed. Simmer on low for 6-8 hrs until the meat is falling apart but still holding its shape.","STEP 3","About 35 mins before serving, heat the remaining oil in a pan. Fry the bacon, shallots and mushrooms for 5-8 mins until caramelised and the veg is starting to soften, then tip into the slow cooker. Simmer the stew gently on high for 30 mins. If you want a thicker gravy, use the reduce function or leave the stew uncovered. Serve with mashed potatoes or crusty bread, if you like."]
'Pork goulash with herby dumplings', ["2 tbsp olive oil","1 ½kg pork tenderloin, cut into strips","2 onions, cut into thin wedges","4 garlic cloves, crushed","1-2 tbsp smoked paprika","500ml beef stock","2 x cans chopped tomato","1 tbsp sugar","3 peppers, chopped","250g self-raising flour","140g shredded suet","1 ½ tsp baking powder","small bunch oregano, most leaves chopped"], ["STEP 1","Heat half the oil in a large frying pan and fry the pork for 4-5 mins until browned. Once done, remove and set aside. You may need to do this in batches. Use remaining oil to fry the onions for 8-10 mins until soft and starting to brown. Then add the garlic and paprika, and cook for 1-2 mins more. Return the pork to the pan and pour in the stock, tomatoes and sugar. Bring to the boil, then turn down and simmer for 20-30 mins until the sauce has thickened.","STEP 2","To make the dumplings, combine all the ingredients, apart from the unchopped oregano leaves, with enough cold water to make a scone-like dough. Roll into approximately 30 walnut-size balls. Stir the peppers into the goulash. Tuck in the dumplings, cover the pan with a lid and cook for 25-30 mins until the dumplings are puffed up. Allow to cool and freeze for up to 2 months, or serve scattered with reserved oregano and some soured cream.","STEP 3","If frozen, defrost then re-heat in the microwave on medium for 4-6 mins for a single portion, and longer for larger servings or gently on the hob, covered, until piping hot."]
'Italian vegetable soup', ["2 each of onions and carrots, chopped","4 sticks celery, chopped","1 tbsp olive oil","2 tbsp sugar","4 garlic cloves, crushed","2 tbsp tomato purée","2 bay leaves","few sprigs thyme","3 courgettes, chopped","400g can butter beans, drained","400g can chopped tomatoes","1.2l vegetable stock","100g parmesan or vegetarian equivalent, grated","140g small pasta shapes","small bunch basil, shredded"], ["STEP 1","Gently cook the onion, carrots and celery in the oil in a large saucepan for 20 mins, until soft. Splash in water if they stick. Add the sugar, garlic, purée, herbs and courgettes and cook for 4-5 mins on a medium heat until they brown a little.","STEP 2","Pour in the beans, tomatoes and stock, then simmer for 20 mins. If you’re freezing it, cool and do so now (freeze for up to three months). If not, add half the Parmesan and the pasta and simmer for 6-8 mins until pasta cooked. Sprinkle with basil and remaining Parmesan to serve. If frozen, defrost then re-heat before adding pasta and cheese and continuing as above."]
'Spicy chicken cacciatore', ["1 tbsp olive oil","4 chicken leg portions, skin on","2 red peppers , deseeded and cut into strips","1 medium red chilli , deseeded and sliced","glass red wine (about 175ml/6fl oz)","½ quantity tomato sauce (see \'Goes well with\')","1-2 handfuls black olives","chopped flatleaf parsley , to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Heat the oil in a deep, ovenproof roasting pan that’s big enough to fit the chicken in a single layer. Season the chicken pieces all over, then place the pan on the hob and cook on a medium heat for 7-10 mins on each side until well browned. Scoop out the chicken with a slotted spoon and put to one side.","STEP 2","Add the peppers and chilli to the pan (there should still be plenty of fat left in it) and cook for 10 mins until soft and beginning to brown at the edges. Pour away any excess fat, then pour in the wine and stir well for 1-2 mins as it bubbles up. Tip the tomato sauce into the pan and stir again. Add a little water (up to 150ml) to achieve a thick, pouring consistency. Nestle the chicken into the sauce and scatter with the olives. Cover, bake for 30 mins, then uncover and cook for 15-20 mins more to allow the chicken to crisp up. Spoon off any fat that has risen to the surface, scatter with parsley and serve with some rice, mashed potato or polenta."]
'So-simple spaghetti bolognese', ["1 tbsp olive oil","1 small carrot , chopped","400g can  plum tomatoes","½ bunch basil , plus extra leaves, to serve","½ recipe Multi mince (see \'Goes well with\' below)","400g spaghetti or other long pasta","25g toasted breadcrumbs"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in non-stick frying pan. Tip in the carrot and cook for 5 mins to soften. Scoop out the tomatoes from the can and add to the pan, and cook for 5 mins more. Pour over the tomato juice and basil, then simmer for 15 mins. Whizz together in a blender until smooth. Can be frozen for up to three months.","STEP 2","Heat through with the Multi mince. Cook spaghetti according to pack instructions. Reserve some of the cooking water, drain and tip the pasta into the pan along with the sauce. Toss together, thinning with pasta water, if needed, and serve with the extra basil leaves on top and the breadcrumbs."]
'Cheese & bacon lasagne', ["3 large onions , halved and thinly sliced","3 tbsp olive oil","1 tsp dried oregano","300g pack lean smoked back bacon , chopped","2 x 400g cans chopped tomatoes in rich juice","20 basil leaves , roughly torn, plus extra to serve if you like","250g pack fresh egg lasagne (check pack for cooking instructions)","600ml milk","50g each butter and plain flour","generous grating fresh nutmeg","50g grated parmesan"], ["STEP 1","Fry the onions in the oil for about 15 mins until golden. Add the oregano and bacon and fry for 5 mins more, stirring frequently. Tip in the tomatoes, season and bubble uncovered for 5 mins. Remove from the heat and stir in the basil.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, make the white sauce. Pour the milk into a pan and tip in the butter and flour. Whisk continuously over a moderate heat to incorporate the flour, then simmer, stirring until thickened. Season with salt, pepper and nutmeg.","STEP 3","Spoon a third of the tomato sauce on the base of a lasagne dish. Top with a third of the lasagne sheets. Then top with a third sauce, a third lasagne, the last of the tomato sauce and finally the last sheets of lasagne. Pour over the white sauce and scatter with the cheese and an extra grating of nutmeg. Chill. If eating straight away, bake at 190C/170C fan/gas 5 for 40 mins until golden and bubbling. Scatter with basil, if you like, and serve with a salad and garlic bread.","STEP 4","To freeze, cool completely, then wrap in cling film, then foil. Will store for 3 months. To serve, thaw for 6 hrs in a cool place. Unwrap and bake at 190C/170C fan/gas 5 for 50-60 mins until thoroughly heated through."]
'Spicy African chicken stew', ["500ml chicken stock , heated","340g jar smooth peanut butter","2 onions , halved and thinly sliced","3 tbsp sunflower oil","3 tbsp finely chopped ginger","½-1 tsp   cayenne pepper (optional)","3 tsp ground coriander","3 tsp ground cumin","1-2 scotch bonnet chillies, deseeded and chopped","2 bay leaves","400g can  chopped tomato","2 x 800g pack chicken thighs and drumsticks, skinned","3 sweet potatoes , cut into chunks","2 red peppers , deseeded and cut into chunks","good handful  coriander , chopped, a little reserved for sprinkling","rice and  lime wedges, to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Pour the hot stock over the peanut butter and stir until dissolved. Heat a very large pan and fry the onions in the oil for 5 mins to soften. Add the ginger, cayenne, if using, ½ tsp black pepper, coriander, cumin, chillies and bay and cook, stirring, for 2 mins.","STEP 2","Tip in the tomatoes and the peanut stock, then stir in the chicken pieces. Put a lid on the pan and leave to simmer for 30 mins, stirring frequently to make sure the peanut butter doesn’t stick to the base of the pan.","STEP 3","Stir in the sweet potatoes, peppers and chopped coriander, then cook for 30 mins more. Serve sprinkled with the reserved coriander, with rice and lime wedges for squeezing over, if you like."]
'Chilli bean bake with soured cream mash', ["2 onions , chopped","1 tbsp olive oil","2 tsp each ground cumin and dried thyme","2 tbsp mild chilli powder","1kg lean minced beef","x can chopped tomatoes","x can kidney beans , rinsed and drained","x can sweetcorn , drained","3 mixed peppers , chopped into chunks","2 tbsp white or red wine vinegar","2 tbsp brown sugar","1 beef stock cube","1.8kg potatoes , chopped into large chunks","300ml pot soured cream","2x small bunches chives , snipped","100g cheddar , grated"], ["STEP 1","Fry the onions in the oil in a large, deep saucepan until soft. Stir in the spices and cook for 2 mins, until fragrant. Crumble in the mince in batches and fry, breaking up with a wooden spoon, until all the meat is browned.","STEP 2","Stir in the chopped tomatoes, beans, sweetcorn, peppers, vinegar and sugar. Crumble in the stock cube, pour over 500ml water then bring to the boil. Cover and simmer for 20 mins, then uncover and simmer for 20 mins more until the mince and peppers are tender and saucy.","STEP 3","Meanwhile, make the mash. Boil the potatoes in lots of boiling salted water until tender, about 15 mins. Drain well, leaving in the colander to steam dry for 1 min, then tip back into the saucepan and mash with the soured cream. Season and stir in the chives.","STEP 4","When the chilli mince is done, pour into 1, 2 or individual ovenproof dishes. Spoon or pipe over the mash and scatter on the cheese. Cool completely if you’re freezing any at this stage, or if you want to eat straight away, heat the oven to 220C/ 200C fan/gas 7 and bake for 25-30 mins until bubbling and golden."]
'Chilli Marrakech', ["1 ½ tbsp cumin seed","1 tbsp olive oil","3 onions , halved and thinly sliced","3 x 400g packs lean lamb mince","2 tbsp finely chopped ginger","4 garlic cloves , finely chopped","2 x 400g cans chopped tomatoes","1 tbsp paprika","1 tbsp ground cinnamon","1 ½ tbsp ground coriander","3 tbsp harissa","3 red peppers , deseeded and cut into large chunks","2 x 400g cans chickpeas , drained","2 x 20g packs coriander , most chopped, a few leaves left whole to serve","500ml beef or  lamb stock , made with 2 cubes"], ["STEP 1","Heat your largest non-stick wok or pan, tip in the cumin seeds and toast for a few secs. Remove. Add the oil to the pan and fry the onions for 5 mins until starting to colour. Add the mince, ginger and garlic, and cook, breaking up the mince with your wooden spoon, until no longer pink. Drain any excess liquid or fat from the pan.","STEP 2","Stir in the tomatoes, toasted cumin, remaining spices and harissa – add more spice if you like an extra kick. Add the peppers, chickpeas, three-quarters of the chopped coriander and the stock. Cover and cook for 40 mins, stirring occasionally, until the sauce is slightly thickened. Remove from the heat. Cool, then stir in the remaining chopped coriander. Can be served or frozen at this point.","STEP 3","Pack into freezer bags and smooth the mince through the bag to flatten. Use within 3 months. To serve, remove from the bags and heat from frozen in a pan on the hob with a little water until bubbling hot, then scatter with coriander."]
'Big-batch bolognese', ["4 tbsp olive oil","6 smoked bacon rashers, chopped","4 onions, finely chopped","3 carrots, finely chopped","4 celery sticks, finely chopped","8 garlic cloves, crushed","2 tbsp dried mixed herbs","2 bay leaves","500g mushrooms, sliced","1½ kg lean minced beef (or use half beef, half pork mince)","6 x 400g cans chopped tomatoes","6 tbsp tomato purée","large glass red wine (optional)","4 tbsp red wine vinegar","1 tbsp sugar","parmesan, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a very large saucepan. Gently cook the bacon, onions, carrots and celery for 20 mins until golden. Add the garlic, herbs, bay and mushrooms, then cook for 2 mins more.","STEP 2","Heat a large frying pan until really hot. Crumble in just enough mince to cover the pan, cook until brown, then tip in with the veg. Continue to fry the mince in batches until used up. Tip the tomatoes and purée in with the mince and veg. Rinse the cans out with the red wine, if you have some, or with a little water, then add to the pan with the vinegar and sugar. Season generously and bring to a simmer. Simmer slowly for 1 hr until thick and saucy and the mince is tender. Serve with pasta and parmesan.","STEP 3","If you want to make this in a\xa0slow cooker, visit our slow cooker bolognese recipe."]
'Sausage ragu', ["3 tbsp olive oil","1 onion, finely chopped","2 large garlic cloves, crushed","¼ tsp chilli flakes","2 rosemary sprigs, leaves finely chopped","2 x 400g cans chopped tomatoes","1 tbsp brown sugar","6 pork sausages","150ml whole milk","1 lemon, zested","350g rigatoni pasta","grated parmesan and ½ small bunch parsley, leaves roughly chopped, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat 2 tbsp of the oil in a saucepan over a medium heat. Fry the onion with a pinch of salt for 7 mins. Add the garlic, chilli and rosemary, and cook for 1 min more. Tip in the tomatoes and sugar, and simmer for 20 mins.","STEP 2","Heat the remaining oil in a medium frying pan over a medium heat. Squeeze the sausagemeat from the skins and fry, breaking it up with a wooden spoon, for 5-7 mins until golden. Add to the sauce with the milk and lemon zest, then simmer for a further 5 mins. To freeze, leave to cool completely and transfer to large freezerproof bags.","STEP 3","Cook the pasta following pack instructions. Drain and toss with the sauce. Scatter over the parmesan and parsley leaves to serve."]
'Fuss-free lasagne', ["250g mozzarella , drained and grated","18-20 no cook lasagne sheets","85g block parmesan , grated","3 tbsp olive oil","4 onions , finely chopped","8 garlic cloves , crushed","1 tbsp dried mixed herbs","2 bay leaves","1kg minced beef","4 x 400g/14oz cans chopped tomatoes","4 tbsp ketchup","small glass red wine (optional)","200g butter","140g flour","1.7l milk","few gratings nutmeg"], ["STEP 1","Make the meat sauce: heat the oil in a large saucepan and gently cook the onions for 10 mins until golden. Add the garlic, herbs and bay, then cook 2 mins more. Heat a large frying pan. Crumble in a quarter of the beef, cook until brown, then add to the onions. Continue to fry the beef in batches and add to the onions until all the meat is used up. Tip the tomatoes and ketchup in with the onions and beef. Rinse the cans out with the red wine, if you have some, or with a little water, then add to the pan. Season and bring to a simmer. Gently cook for 30 mins until thick and saucy, then set aside.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, make the white sauce. Tip everything into a pan, season, then bring to a simmer, whisking continuously. Don’t worry if it’s lumpy – if you whisk enough the sauce will come together. Simmer for 5 mins, whisking, until smooth and thickened, then remove from the heat. If not using straight away, cover with cling film and set aside.","STEP 3","Make sure you divide everything up so that you can make two lasagnes. Place a thin layer of meat sauce in an ovenproof baking dish, drizzle with a little white sauce and scatter with a little mozzarella. Cover with a layer of lasagne sheets, then top with more of both sauces, more mozzarella and more lasagne sheets. Repeat once more, then cover the top layer of lasagne in just white sauce. Finally scatter over some Parmesan. The lasagnes can now be chilled in the fridge for a day ready to be cooked, or frozen for up to 3 months – see tips, below.","STEP 4","To cook, heat oven to 200C/180C fan/ gas 6. Cook for 35-40 mins until brown on the top and crisp around the edges. Leave to settle for 10 mins before cutting into squares and serving with a green salad and some garlic bread, if you like."]
'Sugar-crunch fruitcake', ["100g butter , softened, plus extra for greasing","2 eggs","85g caster sugar","50g self-raising flour","50g ground almonds","zest ½ lemon","2 portions Apple, pear & cherry compote (see \'Goes well with\')","2 tbsp demerara sugar"], ["STEP 1","First make the Apple, pear & cherry compote (see \'Goes well with\'). You\'ll need 2 of the 12 portions of compote for this cake.","STEP 2","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4 and grease a 20cm cake tin. Beat together the butter, eggs, caster sugar, flour, almonds and lemon zest to a smooth mixture. Scrape into the tin, dollop over the compote, then bake for 25-30 mins until well risen. Scatter over the sugar and return to the oven for 10-15 mins until the cake is cooked through.","STEP 3","Remove from the tin and eat warm or at room temperature with cream or custard."]
'Beef & pickle pasties', ["500g pack beef skirt or chuck steak, finely chopped","2 onions , chopped","2 medium potatoes , halved lengthways and sliced","250g swede , diced","8 tbsp pickle","200g butter , diced","100g lard , diced","600g plain flour , plus extra for dusting","1 large egg , beaten with 2 tbsp milk"], ["STEP 1","To make the pastry, rub the butter, lard and 1 tsp salt into the flour with your fingertips, or mix in a food processor. Blend in 8 tbsp cold water to make a firm dough. Cut into 8, cover with cling film and chill for 20 mins.","STEP 2","Heat oven to 220C/200C fan/gas 7. Mix together the beef, onions, potatoes, swede, 1 tbsp black pepper and 1 tsp salt. Roll out each piece of dough on a lightly floured surface to make a round about 20cm across. Use a plate or base of a cake tin to trim the shape.","STEP 3","Pack an eighth of the beef mixture down the centre of each pastry round, leaving a margin at each end, then top with a good spoonful of pickle. Brush all round the edges of the pastry with some of the beaten egg, then carefully draw up the pastry on each side so that it meets at the top, and pinch together to seal.","STEP 4","Lift the pasties onto 2 non-stick baking sheets, brush with egg and bake for 10 mins. Then reduce oven to 180C/ 160C fan/gas 4 and bake for a further 45-55 mins until golden."]
'Vietnamese lamb shanks with sweet potatoes', ["2 tbsp groundnut oil","4 lamb shanks , about 350g each","2 onions , halved and cut into half moons","2 tbsp finely chopped fresh root ginger","3 garlic cloves , finely sliced","2 red chillies , both deseeded, one chopped and one thinly sliced","1 tbsp soft brown sugar , plus 1 tsp","3 star anise","2 lemongrass  stalks, tough outer leaves removed, then bruised","1.2l lamb stock","1 ½ tbsp tomato purée","4 sweet potatoes , peeled and cut into big chunks","2 tbsp fish sauce","juice 2 limes","big handful mint  leaves, torn","handful basil leaves"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 160C/140C fan/gas 3. Heat 1 tbsp oil in a heavy-bottomed casserole, season the shanks, then brown them 2 at a time on all sides, adding the remaining oil for the second batch. Remove the lamb and add the onions. Fry them quite briskly, about 30 secs, add the ginger, garlic and chopped chilli, then turn the heat down and cook for 1 min. Add 1 tbsp sugar, stir, then add the star anise, lemongrass, stock, purée and seasoning. Bring to the boil.","STEP 2","Cover and cook in the oven for 1½ hrs, then add the sweet potatoes and cook for 1 hr more. The lamb should be completely tender and almost falling off the bones. Stir in the fish sauce, lime juice and 1 tsp sugar to just lift the flavour, then scatter with the mint, basil and the sliced chilli to serve."]
'Balsamic steaks with peppercorn wedges', ["2 tbsp balsamic vinegar","2 tsp concentrated liquid beef stock","3 garlic cloves , finely grated","1 tbsp wholegrain mustard","1 tbsp clear honey","2 tbsp olive oil , plus extra for brushing","6 sirloin steaks , about 5cm thick","salad or peas, to serve (optional)","1 ½kg medium potato , such as King Edward, cut into wedges","3 tbsp sunflower oil , plus extra for greasing","1 tbsp thyme leaf","2 tsp green peppercorn , crushed"], ["STEP 1","Mix together the vinegar, stock, garlic, mustard, honey and olive oil in a large shallow bowl, then grind in some black pepper, but no salt. Add the steaks and turn to coat. Leave to marinate in the fridge for 1 hr, or preferably overnight.","STEP 2","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Toss the potatoes in a large bowl with the oil, thyme and peppercorns. Spread out on 2 greased baking sheets and bake for 10-15 mins until the potatoes are nearly cooked. Remove and leave to go cold.","STEP 3","Open-freeze the wedges until solid, then pack into a large rigid container in layers, interleaving with foil. Individually pack the steaks into freezer bags – make sure they lay completely flat when you put them in the freezer. Use within 1 month.","STEP 4","To serve, heat oven to 220C/200C fan/ gas 7, with a baking tray inside to warm up for the steaks. Put the wedges on another large baking tray, spread them apart and season. Bake for 20 mins until golden and crisp. Unwrap the steaks and brush both sides with oil. Press onto the hot tray and bake for 15-25 mins, turning after 10 mins and testing until hot, to give you medium-rare steak. Serve with the wedges and salad or peas, if you like."]
'Chicken, leek & parsley pie', ["1.4kg chicken","1 each carrot , onion and celery stick","50g butter","2 leeks sliced","2 tbsp plain flour","grated zest 1 lemon","large bunch parsley chopped","3 tbsp crème fraîche","250g ready-made puff pastry","beaten egg or milk, to glaze","bouquet garni  (see \'Try\', below)"], ["STEP 1","Put the chicken in a pan, which is large enough to take it snugly. Roughly chop the carrot, onion and celery and tuck around the chicken with the bouquet garni. Pour in enough water to come just over halfway up the chicken, then season with salt and pepper.","STEP 2","Bring to the boil, then reduce the heat, cover tightly and simmer gently for 1-1¼ hrs, until the chicken is well cooked. Carefully lift the chicken out onto a board lined with kitchen paper to absorb any stock that leaks out. Then strain the stock, discarding the veggies, and measure 500ml into a jug – any extra you can cool and freeze for another time.","STEP 3","Heat the oven to 200C/fan 180C/gas 6. Strip the meat from the chicken, discarding the skin and bones. Cut the meat into large chunks and put into a 1-litre pie dish.","STEP 4","Melt the butter in a pan, add the leeks and fry until starting to soften. Sift in the flour and cook for 1 min. Gradually stir in the stock, cooking until the sauce is smooth and glossy. Take off the heat and add lemon, parsley and crème fraîche. Season. Pour the sauce over the chicken and leave to cool.","STEP 5","Roll out the pastry and trim to 5cm larger than the pie dish. Brush the edge of the dish with water. Lay the pastry on the pie, tucking the edges under to make a double layer around the rim. Press the pastry edge to seal it. Roll out any trimmings to make leaves for the top. Brush the pastry with milk or egg and bake for 30-35 mins until the pastry is golden."]
'Creamy prawn & spring vegetable pot', ["850ml low-salt chicken or vegetable stock","100g pearl barley","750g new potato , sliced","½ spring green cabbage , shredded","140g frozen broad or soya beans","100g frozen pea","250g broccoli florets","200g tub crème fraîche","small bunch dill , snipped","zest 1 lemon , plus squeeze of juice","600g cooked, peeled prawn"], ["STEP 1","Bring the stock to a simmer in a large frying pan or shallow casserole covered with a lid. Add the pearl barley, cover and cook for 10 mins. Then add the potatoes and cook covered for 12-15 mins until tender.","STEP 2","Remove the lid, increase the heat and bubble the stock for a few mins to reduce. Stir in the greens, crème fraîche, dill, zest and juice. If you’re freezing, cool at this stage. If eating straight away, simmer for 3-4 mins until veg is just tender.","STEP 3","Just before serving, stir in the prawns to heat through and season to taste. If freezing, cool completely then scatter the prawns on top and freeze. Defrost fully in the fridge overnight then gently bring back to a simmer, uncovered, until veg is tender and prawns hot through."]
'Multi mince', ["2 tbsp olive oil","1kg lean minced beef","2 back bacon  rashers, chopped","2 onions , finely chopped","2 garlic cloves , finely chopped","150ml red wine","500ml beef stock  (from a cube is fine)","leaves from 3 sprigs thyme"], ["STEP 1","Heat the olive oil in a non-stick frying pan. When hot, tip in the mince and cook for 10 mins until browned all over, breaking up any lumps with the back of a spoon. Tip onto a plate. You may need to do this in batches.","STEP 2","Add the bacon to the pan with the onions and garlic, then cook for 7 mins until the bacon is cooked and onion softened. Return the mince to the pan, then pour in the red wine, stock and thyme leaves. Bring to a boil, then simmer for 30 mins until the mince is tender and the sauce has reduced down. Once cool, can be frozen for up to 3 months."]
'Apple, pear & cherry compote', ["8 eating apples , peeled, cored and cut into chunks","4 medium Bramley apples , peeled, cored and cut into chunks","8 firm pears , peeled, cored and thickly sliced","6 tbsp sugar , or to taste","280g dried sour cherries (or dried cranberries)"], ["STEP 1","Put the apples and pears in a pan with the sugar and 50ml water. Bring to a simmer, then gently cook, covered, for 15 mins or so until the Bramley apple has collapsed to a purée and the eating apple and pear are tender (stir to make sure it doesn’t catch on the bottom).","STEP 2","Stir in the cherries or cranberries for 1 min, taste and add a little more sugar if necessary. Can be chilled for 3-5 days. Serve with vanilla ice cream, if you like. See \'Goes well with\' for ideas for using up the compote."]
'Friday night fish pie', ["1½kg potato, chopped into chunks","50g butter","1½l full-fat milk","800g skinless white fish","600g skinless smoked haddock fillet","1 onion, quartered","2 bay leaves","140g butter","140g plain flour","nutmeg, to season","small bunch parsley, leaves only, finely chopped","200g cooked, peeled prawns","6 eggs, hard-boiled and quartered (just 3 eggs if you are freezing one of the pies, as the eggs can\'t be frozen)"], ["STEP 1","Simmer the potatoes for about 20 mins until tender, then drain and mash with most of the butter, plenty of seasoning and a little milk. Season and set aside.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, cut the fish into 2cm cubes. Bring the milk just to a simmer in a large frying pan – when you see a few small bubbles, add the fish, onion and bay leaves, then cover and cook for 6-8 mins. Lift the fish out onto a plate and strain the milk into a jug.","STEP 3","Melt the butter in a pan, stir in the flour and cook for 1 min over a medium heat. Take off the heat, pour in a little poaching milk, then stir until blended. Continue to add the milk gradually, mixing well until you have a smooth sauce. Return to the heat, bring to the boil, then simmer for 5 mins, stirring continuously, until it coats the back of a spoon. Remove from the heat, season with salt, pepper and nutmeg, then mix in the parsley.","STEP 4","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Divide the fish between 2 ovenproof dishes, about 1.3 litres each and strain any juices into the sauce. Scatter over the prawns, then add the eggs to both dishes if eating straightaway, or to just one dish if freezing the other. Pour the sauce over both. Spoon half of the mash over one dish so it covers everything, making sure it reaches the sides. Rough up the top with a fork and dot with remaining butter. Bake for 30 mins until the top is golden. Freeze the remaining fish and mash (see tips, below)."]
'Creamy curried chicken pie', ["1 ½kg whole chicken","2 onions , 1 quartered, 1 chopped","2 carrots , 1 cut into 3-4 chunks, 1 finely chopped","2 thick slices ginger","2 garlic cloves , crushed","small bunch parsley or coriander, leaves picked and chopped, stalks left whole","50g butter","vegetable oil or rapeseed oil, for frying","50g flour","2-3 tbsp mild curry paste , such as korma or tikka","½ tsp ground turmeric","1 chicken stock cube","150ml double cream","6 sheets filo pastry","A little melted butter or oil","Tenderstem broccoli , if you like"], ["STEP 1","Put the chicken, quartered onion, carrot chunks, ginger, garlic and herb stalks in a large stock pot. Cover the chicken completely with water, bring to a simmer, then turn down the heat, cover and cook gently for 1 hr. Turn the chicken over halfway through cooking and top up the water if you need to. After 1 hr the chicken should be tender – try pulling a leg away from the breast with some tongs. If there’s much resistance, keep cooking, checking every 10 mins or so. Carefully remove the chicken from the cooking liquid and leave to cool on a plate for about 10 mins.","STEP 2","Shred the chicken meat and discard the fat and bones. Strain the cooking liquid (this is your stock) and discard the onions, carrots and other bits (or keep them to make soup). Measure out 500ml of the stock.","STEP 3","Melt the butter in a pan (use the stock pan if it’s empty – you don’t need to wash it). Add a drizzle of oil and the chopped onion and carrot. Cook until the veg is soft, for about 8-10 mins. Stir in the flour, curry paste\xa0and turmeric, then crumble in the stock cube. As you stir, the ingredients will clump together. Keep cooking for a min or so, then add a ladleful of the chicken cooking liquid. Stir well until smooth, then add another ladleful. Continue until all of the stock has been used up and you have a smooth sauce.","STEP 4","Stir the chicken, cream and chopped herbs into the sauce, then season well and remove from the heat.\xa0If freezing portions at this stage, transfer to a sealable container or bag, cool, then freeze for up to two months. Defrost thoroughly in the fridge before reheating in a pan or the microwave. See tips below for serving suggestions.","STEP 5","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/ gas 4. Transfer the creamy curried chicken to a pie dish, about 25 x 5cm. Brush 6 sheets filo pastry with a little melted butter or oil and scrunch the sheets on top of the pie, covering the filling. Bake the pie for about 45-50 mins, until the top is crisp and the curried chicken is bubbling and hot. Serve with Tenderstem broccoli, if you like."]
'Crusty cheddar pies', ["500g slim young  leek , thickly sliced","300g broccoli , cut into small florets","3 celery sticks, de-stringed and sliced","1 ½kg floury potato , such as King Edward, cut into even-sized chunks","85g butter","170g pot 0% fat Greek yogurt","850ml semi-skimmed milk","75g plain flour","2 tsp English mustard","1 tsp wholegrain mustard","300g pack mature cheddar , finely grated","handful frozen peas"], ["STEP 1","Bring a large pan of salted water to the boil. Put the leeks, broccoli and celery in a large steamer. Add the potatoes to the water and cook for 20 mins, with the vegetables steaming on top, until all are tender. Drain the potatoes, then mash with plenty of seasoning, 25g of the butter and all the yogurt.","STEP 2","While the veg cooks, pour the milk into a pan, add the flour, both mustards and remaining butter, and cook over a medium heat, whisking all the time, until smooth and thickened. Stir in half the cheese and season. Remove from heat.","STEP 3","Divide the steamed veg and peas between 8 individual pie dishes. Pour over the sauce and top with the mash, then sprinkle over the remaining cheese.","STEP 4","Pack into freezer bags and use within 3 months. To serve, unwrap and put the dishes on a baking tray in the cold oven, then set to 200C/180C fan/ gas 6. Bake for 50-55 mins until bubbling and hot all the way through."]
'Italian cottage pie', ["700g floury potatoes , sliced","25g butter","50g grated parmesan","140g pancetta or streaky bacon, cut into strips","2 oregano sprigs, leaves stripped, or 2 tsp dried oregano","½ quantity beef with red wine & carrots (see \'Goes well with\')"], ["STEP 1","First make the Beef with red wine & carrots (see \'Goes well with\'). You will need half the finished stew for this recipe.","STEP 2","Heat oven to 220C/200C fan/gas 7. Cook the potatoes in boiling, salted water for 10 mins until almost done. Drain well, then mix with the butter and half the Parmesan.","STEP 3","In a large saucepan, fry the pancetta or bacon until golden. Stir in the fresh oregano leaves or dried oregano, then add the beef stew and heat through. Tip into an ovenproof dish and top with the cheesy potatoes, overlapping. Sprinkle with the remaining Parmesan and bake for 20 mins until golden and crisp on top. Serve with a green salad."]
'Basic tomato sauce', ["4 tbsp olive oil","2 onions, finely chopped","2 carrots, finely chopped","2 celery sticks, finely chopped","2 garlic cloves, crushed","2 bay leaves","1 tsp sugar","4 x 400g/14oz cans chopped tomatoes"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a pan and add the vegetables and bay leaf. Stir in the sugar with some salt. Gently cook for 10-15 mins until the veg is tender. Stir in the tomatoes and 150ml water. Simmer very gently for 30 mins until the sauce has reduced by two-thirds and is very thick. (If you have doubled or tripled the quantities, this may take up to 1 hr.)","STEP 2","Stir occasionally, particularly towards the end of the cooking time, so that the sauce doesn’t catch on the bottom. If you like your sauce a little thinner, add a splash of water. Serve half with pasta and chill or freeze other half in 1-2 batches for later use (see \'Goes well with\' for ideas of how to use up your sauce)."]
'Bean & sausage hotpot', ["8 large sausages (course-cut ones like Toulouse or Cumberland are ideal)","¼ quantity tomato sauce (see \'Goes well with\')","3 x 400g/14oz cans butter beans","1 tbsp black treacle or muscovado sugar","1 tsp English mustard"], ["STEP 1","In a large casserole, fry the sausages until brown all over – about 10 mins.","STEP 2","Add the tomato sauce, stirring well, then stir in the beans, treacle or sugar and mustard. Bring to the simmer, cover and cook for 30 mins. Great served with crusty bread or rice."]
'Beef with red wine & carrots', ["vegetable or sunflower oil , for frying","1 ½kg shin of beef or stewing beef, cut into cubes","3 tbsp flour","2 large  onions, sliced","600g carrots, cut into batons","4 garlic cloves, crushed","glass red wine (about 175ml/6fl oz)","850ml beef stock","3 bay leaves","few  thyme sprigs","jacket potatoes or mash, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat 1 tbsp oil in a large frying pan. Put the beef in a bowl, sprinkle with the flour and seasoning, then mix until well coated. Fry in batches, adding more oil if necessary, until everything is well browned. Transfer to a casserole dish.","STEP 2","Add another tbsp oil to the pan and stir in the onion and carrots. Cover and gently cook for 10-12 mins until softened, then remove the lid and cook until just beginning to brown. Stir in the garlic and cook for 1 min more. Pour in the wine and stir well, letting it boil up for 1 min, then pour the whole mixture over the meat. Add the stock, bay leaves and thyme, bring to a simmer, then cover and gently simmer for 2½ hrs until the meat is very tender. If the sauce looks a bit thin, remove the lid and continue to cook until it thickens. Eat half now; chill or freeze the rest for later (see \'Goes well with\' for ideas on using the rest of the stew)."]
'Broccoli pasta bake', ["1l milk","2 garlic cloves , bashed","2 bay leaves","500g dried pasta","350g broccoli , in small florets","75g butter","75g plain flour","a little freshly grated nutmeg","1 tsp mustard powder","small bunch parsley , roughly chopped","200g cheese , grated (cheddar, Parmesan, Gruyère, or a mixture)"], ["STEP 1","Bring the milk, garlic and bay leaves to the boil in a small saucepan, then remove from the heat and leave to infuse. Cook the pasta to al dente following pack instructions (if you’re freezing, cook for 1 min less), adding the broccoli for the final 2 mins. Drain.","STEP 2","Strain the milk into a jug. Heat the butter in the pan until foaming then stir in the flour for 1 min. Add the milk a little at a time, stirring or whisking constantly to remove any lumps. Bubble for 1-2 mins, stirring constantly until you have a thick, lump-free sauce.","STEP 3","Remove from the heat and stir in some nutmeg, the mustard powder, parsley, three-quarters of the cheese and seasoning. Combine with the pasta and broccoli and transfer to one large, or individual, heatproof dishes. Scatter over the remaining cheese and cool and freeze for up to three months, or heat the grill to high and cook for 2-3 mins until golden and bubbling. If frozen, defrost in the fridge overnight, then cook at 200C/180C fan/gas 6 for 30-40 mins until piping hot."]
'Creamy salmon with chunky ratatouille', ["1 tbsp olive oil","2 aubergines , cubed","6 garlic cloves , sliced","family pack mixed peppers (5 total), deseeded and cut into large chunks","3 large  courgettes , cut into chunky batons","680g bottle passata","300ml vegetable stock","small handful basil leaves , most chopped, a few leaves left whole to serve","125g tub garlic cream cheese (we used Boursin Light)","100g low-fat cream cheese","40g fresh  breadcrumb","40g pine nut , roughly chopped","8 skinless  salmon fillets","crusty bread , to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a large non-stick wok or pan, add the aubergines and cook for 5 mins, stirring, until starting to soften and brown. Add the garlic and stir for a few secs. Tip in the peppers, courgettes, passata, stock and half the chopped basil. Season, cover and cook for 20 mins, stirring occasionally, until the veg is just tender. Cool, stir in the remaining basil and spoon into 8 x 250ml shallow ovenproof dishes or foil containers.","STEP 2","For the salmon, beat together the cheeses. Mix the breadcrumbs and pine nuts on a plate. Spread the top of the fish fillets with the cheese mix, then dip in the nutty crumbs to coat the cheese. Put a fillet on top of each ratatouille-filled dish.","STEP 3","Put the dishes inside freezer bags and seal. Use within 6 weeks. To serve, unwrap the dishes, put on a baking tray in a cold oven, then set to 200C/180C fan/ gas 6. Bake for 55 mins until bubbling and the fish is cooked. Check after 30 mins – if the crumbs are getting too brown, cover the fish with foil. Serve scattered with basil, with bread, if you like."]
'Cheese & spinach penne with walnut crumble', ["500g pack  penne","2 large  leeks , sliced","85g butter","85g plain flour","2 tsp ready-made English mustard","good grating  nutmeg","1l milk , plus a bit extra","350g pack  mature cheddar , grated","4 slices French bread , diced","85g walnut piece","400g bag spinach"], ["STEP 1","If you are eating one of the pasta bakes now, heat oven to 190C/170C fan/ gas 5. Boil the pasta with the leeks for 10 mins, then drain.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, put the butter, flour, mustard, nutmeg and milk in a large pan with some seasoning. Gently heat, stirring all the time, until bubbling and thickened, then cook for 2 mins more, stirring frequently. Remove from the heat and stir in two-thirds of the cheese. Toss the remaining cheese with the bread and walnuts.","STEP 3","Cook the spinach in the microwave, or pour a kettle of boiling water over it to wilt, then squeeze out the excess water. Stir into the sauce with the pasta, leeks and some seasoning. If necessary, add a little extra milk to loosen. Divide between 2 ovenproof dishes and scatter the bread mixture on top. If eating straight away, bake for 40 mins until golden, or cool to freeze."]
'Soup maker broccoli and stilton soup', ["1 onion , finely chopped","1 celery stick, sliced","1 leek , sliced","1 medium potato , diced","750ml low salt or homemade chicken or vegetable stock","1 head broccoli , roughly chopped","140g stilton , or other blue cheese, crumbled"], ["STEP 1","Put all the ingredients into the soup maker, except the stilton, and press the ‘smooth soup’ function. Make sure you don’t fill the soup maker above the max fill line.","STEP 2","Once the cycle is complete, season, and stir in most of the stilton. Blend briefly again until the cheese has melted into the soup. Season with more black pepper and top with the reserved cheese to serve."]
'Macadamia & cranberry American cookies', ["3 x 200g/7oz white chocolate bars, chopped","200g butter","2 eggs","100g light  muscovado sugar","175g golden caster sugar","2 tsp vanilla extract","350g plain flour","2 tsp baking powder","1 tsp cinnamon","100g dried cranberry","100g macadamia nut , chopped"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Melt 170g of the chocolate, then allow to cool. Beat in the butter, eggs, sugars and vanilla, preferably with an electric hand whisk, until creamy. Stir in the flour, baking powder, cinnamon and cranberries with two-thirds of the remaining chocolate and macadamias, to make a stiff dough.","STEP 2","Using a tablespoon measure or a small ice-cream scoop, drop small mounds onto a large baking dish, spacing them well apart, then poke in the reserved chocolate, nuts and berries. Bake in batches for 12 mins until pale golden, leave to harden for 1-2 mins, then cool on a wire rack.","STEP 3","To freeze, open-freeze the raw cookie dough scoops on baking trays; when solid, pack them into a freezer container, interleaving the layers with baking parchment. Use within 3 months. Bake from frozen for 15-20 mins."]
'One-pot chicken & bacon stew', ["3 tbsp olive oil","16 chicken pieces on the bone (about 3kg/6lb 8oz in total)","140g smoked bacon, chopped or lardons or cubetti di pancetta","4 medium carrots, thickly sliced","2 onions, roughly chopped","2 tbsp plain flour","1 tbsp tomato purée","75ml white wine or cider vinegar","1l chicken stock","2 bay leaves","4 tbsp double cream or crème fraîche","600g small new potatoes, halved","12 large white mushrooms, quartered","chopped herbs, such as parsley, tarragon or chives"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Heat the oil in a large flameproof casserole with a lid. Fry the chicken pieces in batches for 5 mins on each side until well browned, then transfer to a plate. Sizzle the bacon in the casserole for a few mins until beginning to crisp. Stir in the carrots and onions, then cook for 5 mins until starting to soften. Stir in the flour and tomato purée and cook for 1 min more. Finally, splash in the vinegar and stir well.","STEP 2","Pour in the stock and bring to a simmer. Add the bay, cream and seasoning. Slide in the chicken pieces and scatter over the potatoes, turning everything over a few times so that the potatoes are immersed in the sauce. Put the lid on and place in the oven. After 40 mins, remove from the oven and stir in the mushrooms. Cover again and cook in the oven for 10 mins more until the chicken is cooked through and tender but not completely falling off the bone. You can now turn off the heat, and chill and freeze some or all of it (see freezing tips, below). If eating straight away, cook for 10 mins more, then sprinkle over the herbs and serve."]
'Quick cottage pie', ["100g pack mushrooms, halve them if large","1tbsp olive oil","1tbsp plain flour","½ recipe Multi mince  (see link below)","750g potatoes, quartered","75ml buttermilk or skimmed milk","2 spring onions, thinly sliced"], ["STEP 1","Tip the mushrooms into a pan with the oil and cook for 5 mins until browned. Mix in the flour, then add the Multi mince. Cook until heated through and the sauce is slightly thickened, then tip the mixture into a medium-sized ovenproof dish. Heat oven to 220C/fan 200C/gas 7.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, cook the potatoes in a large pan of boiling salted water for 15 mins until soft. Drain and mash with the buttermilk, then stir in half the spring onions. Spoon over the mince and fluff up. Cook in the oven for 15 mins until the top is lightly browned. Serve sprinkled with spring onions."]
'Chicken & mushroom hot-pot', ["50g butter or margarine, plus extra for greasing","1 onion, chopped","100g button mushrooms, sliced","40g plain flour","1 chicken stock cube or 500ml fresh chicken stock","pinch of nutmeg","pinch of mustard powder","250g cooked chicken, chopped","2 handfuls of a mixed pack of sweetcorn, peas, broccoli and carrots, or pick your favourites","2 large potatoes, sliced into rounds","knob of butter, melted"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Put the butter in a medium-size saucepan and place over a medium heat. Add the onion and leave to cook for 5 mins, stirring occasionally. Add the mushrooms to the saucepan with the onions.","STEP 2","Once the onion and mushrooms are almost cooked, stir in the flour – this will make a thick paste called a roux. If you are using a stock cube, crumble the cube into the roux now and stir well. Put the roux over a low heat and stir continuously for 2 mins – this will cook the flour and stop the sauce from having a floury taste.","STEP 3","Take the roux off the heat. Slowly add the fresh stock, if using, or pour in 500ml water if you’ve used a stock cube, stirring all the time. Once all the liquid has been added, season with pepper, a pinch of nutmeg and mustard powder. Put the saucepan back onto a medium heat and slowly bring it to the boil, stirring all the time. Once the sauce has thickened, place on a very low heat. Add the cooked chicken and vegetables to the sauce and stir well. Grease a medium-size ovenproof pie dish with a little butter and pour in the chicken and mushroom filling.","STEP 4","Carefully lay the potatoes on top of the hot-pot filling, overlapping them slightly, almost like a pie top.","STEP 5","Brush the potatoes with a little melted butter and cook in the oven for about 35 mins. The hot-pot is ready once the potatoes are cooked and golden brown."]
'Pasta with salmon & peas', ["240g wholewheat fusilli","knob of butter","1 large shallot, finely chopped","140g frozen peas","2 skinless salmon fillets, cut into chunks","140g low-fat crème fraîche","½ low-salt vegetable stock cube","small bunch of chives, snipped"], ["STEP 1","Bring a pan of water to the boil and cook the fusilli according to the pack instructions.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, heat a\xa0knob of\xa0butter in a saucepan, then add the shallot and cook for 5 mins or until softened.","STEP 3","Add the peas, salmon, crème fraîche and 50ml water. Crumble in the stock cube.","STEP 4","Cook for 3-4 mins until cooked through, stir in the chives and some black pepper. Then stir through to coat the pasta. Serve in bowls."]
'Quick sausage bolognese', ["6 good-quality sausages , skins removed","1 tsp fennel seed","250g pack mushroom , sliced","150ml red wine  (optional)","660g jar tomato pasta sauce  (we used Loyd Grossman’s tomato & chilli)","300g penne","grated or shaved parmesan , to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat a large, wide frying pan, then crumble in the sausage meat and fennel seeds (there’s no need to add any oil). Fry for a few mins until golden and the fat is released, stirring well to break up the meat. Add the mushrooms and fry for a few mins until beginning to soften. Stir in the wine now, if using, bubble for 1 min, then add the tomato sauce and heat through until bubbling.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, boil the penne. When ready, drain and tip into the sauce. Mix well until completely coated, then divide between four plates, finishing with a little parmesan."]
'Turkey burgers with sweet potato chips', ["500g turkey thigh mince","2 spring onions , finely chopped","85g cheddar , grated","1kg sweet potato , peeled and cut into chips","3 tbsp olive oil","4 soft wholemeal rolls","¼ x  cucumber (or 1 small Lebanese cucumber), thinly sliced","tomato ketchup","salad , to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Put the turkey mince in a large bowl, with the spring onions, cheddar and some seasoning. Mix well, then shape into 4 even-sized burgers. Chill for 15 mins.","STEP 2","Put the sweet potato chips on a large non-stick baking tray, and toss in 2 tbsp of the oil and some salt. Cook in the oven for 30 mins, turning halfway through.","STEP 3","Heat the remaining oil in a large frying pan over a medium heat and cook the burgers for 10 mins until golden. Turn over and repeat for the other side until they are cooked through. Split the rolls, place a burger into each with some sliced cucumber and a dollop of ketchup, and serve alongside the sweet potato chips and salad, if you like."]
'Meatball & garlic bread traybake', ["350g turkey thigh mince","1 tsp dried oregano","1 tsp fennel seeds","1½ tbsp  olive oil","1 large  onion,  chopped","3 garlic cloves,  crushed","1 tbsp tomato purée","2 x 400g cans chopped  tomatoes","2 tsp sugar","150g ball  mozzarella,  torn into pieces","4 garlic breadsticks or garlic bread slices, torn or chopped into chunks","25g cheddar,  grated","green salad or spaghetti, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Combine the mince, oregano, fennel seeds and some seasoning in a bowl. Take walnut-sized pieces of the mixture and roll into balls. Heat half the oil in a large, shallow ovenproof pan and cook the meatballs until browned all over – don’t worry if they’re not cooked through. Transfer to a plate. Heat the oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6.","STEP 2","Heat the remaining oil in the pan and add the onion. Cook until softened, about 10-12 mins, stirring regularly. Stir in the garlic for another minute, then the tomato purée, chopped tomatoes and sugar.","STEP 3","Simmer for 10-15 mins, then season to taste. Place the meatballs on top of the sauce, then add the mozzarella, garlic bread and the cheddar on top. Bake for 15-20 mins until golden and crisp."]
'Nutty chicken & lemon spaghetti', ["4 small boneless and skinless chicken thighs","2 tbsp olive oil","80g stale white bread , torn into small pieces","140ml whole milk","100g walnuts","1 large garlic clove","½ lemon , zested and juiced","300g spaghetti","1⁄2 small bunch of parsley , finely chopped","grated parmesan , to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat the grill to medium. Put the chicken on a baking tray, drizzle with ½ tbsp oil and season. Grill for 8-10 mins on each side or until cooked through. Shred the meat with two forks.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, soak the bread in the milk for 5 mins, then tip into a food processor with the walnuts, remaining oil, garlic, lemon zest and juice. Pulse to a smooth creamy texture. Season.","STEP 3","Bring a large pan of salted water to the boil. Add the spaghetti and cook according to pack instructions.","STEP 4","Drain the spaghetti, reserving a mugful of cooking water (about 200ml). Return the spaghetti to the pan and toss with the walnut sauce, shredded chicken, most of the pasta water and the parsley. Toss to coat, and add a little more pasta water to loosen, if you need to. Check for seasoning and serve in bowls topped with the parmesan."]
'One-pan egg & veg brunch', ["300g baby new potatoes , halved","½ tbsp rapeseed oil","1 knob of butter","1 courgette , cut into small chunks","1 yellow pepper , cut into small chunks","1 red pepper , cut into small chunks","2 spring onions , finely sliced","1 garlic clove , crushed","1 sprig thyme , leaves picked","4 eggs","toast , to serve"], ["STEP 1","Boil the new potatoes for 8 mins, then drain.","STEP 2","Heat the oil and butter in a large non-stick frying pan, then add the courgette, peppers, potatoes and a little salt and pepper. Cook for 10 mins, stirring from time to time until everything is starting to brown. Add the spring onions, garlic and thyme and cook for 2 mins more.","STEP 3","Make four spaces in the pan and crack in the eggs. Cover with foil or a lid and cook for around 4 mins, or until the eggs are cooked (with the yolks soft for dipping into). Sprinkle with more thyme leaves and ground black pepper if you like. Serve with toast."]
'Sausage & leek mash pie', ["4 large potatoes , peeled and cut into 3cm chunks","2 tbsp oil","6 pork sausages","1 tbsp plain flour","450ml fresh chicken gravy","150g kale , shredded","3 leeks , finely sliced","½ tbsp  wholegrain mustard","2-3 tbsp whole milk","50g smoked or ordinary cheddar , grated"], ["STEP 1","Boil the potatoes for 12 mins or until tender. Drain and leave to steam-dry.","STEP 2","Heat 1 tbsp oil in a shallow casserole or deep skillet (20-25cm). Pinch the sausages out of their skins into large pieces, directly into the pan, and fry over a medium heat for 7-8 mins or until golden brown. Add the flour and stir everything together, cooking for 1 min. Pour in the gravy and 100-200ml water (depending on how thick you like your gravy), bring to a simmer, then add the kale and cook for 5 mins. Remove from the heat.","STEP 3","Meanwhile, in a separate pan, add the remaining 1 tbsp oil, then the leeks and fry for 5-10 mins until tender, adding a small splash of water to help them cook. Heat your grill to its highest setting.","STEP 4","Mash the potatoes until smooth. Stir though the leeks, mustard and milk, and season. Spoon and swirl the mash on top of the sausage mixture, then scatter over the grated cheese and grill for 3-5 mins or until golden and bubbling."]
'Sausages with braised cabbage & caraway', ["1 tsp vegetable oil","8 good-quality, large pork sausages , or Bratwurst","1 tbsp butter","2 onions , halved then thinly sliced","2 tsp caraway seeds","½ firm, round cabbage , cut through the core into 4 wedges","300ml good-quality chicken stock","3 tbsp crème fraîche","mashed potato , to serve","medium-hot mustard , to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a large frying pan. Add the sausages and fry them over a medium-high heat for 10 mins, turning as they take on colour. Remove from the pan, then wipe out the pan with kitchen paper.","STEP 2","Melt the butter in the pan and tip in the onions. Season, cover and cook for 10 mins, stirring a few times during cooking, until the onions are softening and dark golden here and there.","STEP 3","Sprinkle the caraway seeds into the onions, fry for 2 mins more, then nestle the cabbage wedges into the pan. Pour in the stock, pop on the lid and simmer for 5 mins. Add the sausages to the pan and cook for 10 mins more until the cabbage is tender but still holding some of its green colour, and the sausages are cooked through. Spoon in the crème fraîche and shake the pan a few times to help it mix into the rich onion sauce below. Serve in wide bowls with mashed potatoes and mustard."]
'Turkey meatloaf', ["1 tbsp olive oil","1 large onion , finely chopped","1 garlic clove , crushed","2 tbsp Worcestershire sauce","2 tsp tomato purée , plus 1 tbsp for the beans","500g turkey mince (thigh is best)","1 large egg , beaten","85g fresh white breadcrumbs","2 tbsp barbecue sauce , plus 4 tbsp for the beans","2 x 400g cans cannellini beans","1-2 tbsp roughly chopped parsley"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Heat the oil in a large frying pan and cook the onion for 8-10 mins until softened. Add the garlic, Worcestershire sauce and 2 tsp tomato purée, and stir until combined. Set aside to cool.","STEP 2","Put the turkey mince, egg, breadcrumbs and cooled onion mix in a large bowl and season well. Mix everything to combine, then shape into a rectangular loaf and place in a large roasting tin. Spread 2 tbsp barbecue sauce over the meatloaf and bake for 30 mins.","STEP 3","Meanwhile, drain 1 can of beans only, then pour both cans into a large bowl. Add the remaining barbecue sauce and tomato purée. Season and set aside.","STEP 4","When the meatloaf has had its initial cooking time, scatter the beans around the outside and bake for 15 mins more until the meatloaf is cooked through and the beans are piping hot. Scatter over the parsley and serve the meatloaf in slices."]
'Easy fish cakes', ["1 x pack fish pie mix (cod, salmon, smoked haddock etc, weight around 320g-400g depending on pack size)","3 spring onions, finely chopped","100ml milk","450g potato, peeled, large ones cut in half","75g frozen sweetcorn, defrosted","handful of grated cheddar cheese","1 large egg, beaten","flour, for dusting","olive oil, for frying"], ["STEP 1","Cook the potatoes in boiling water until just tender. Drain well and return to the pan on a low heat. Heat for another minute or two to evaporate excess liquid. Mash the potato with a small knob of butter. Allow to cool.","STEP 2","Put the fish spring onions and milk in a shallow dish, cover with cling film and cook in the microwave for 1 ½ - 2 mins until just cooked. If you don’t have a microwave, put everything in a saucepan and gently cook until just opaque and cooked through.","STEP 3","Drain the fish and spring onions through a fine sieve. Gently mix through the potatoes, avoiding breaking up the fish too much, along with the sweetcorn, cheddar and a generous grind of black pepper. Form into 6 - 8 patties. The cooler the mash potato is when you do this, the easier it will be to form the patties as the mixture will be very soft when warm.","STEP 4","Pour the egg on one plate and scatter flour on the other. Dip the patties in egg and then flour and arrange on a sheet of baking paper on a tray. Put the patties in the fridge for at least half an hour to firm up if the patties feel very soft. At this point you can freeze the patties, wrapped individually. Defrost throughly before moving onto the next stage.","STEP 5","Heat a large frying pan with a generous glug of olive oil. When the oil is hot, carefully lower the fish cakes into the pan. Cook for 5 - 7 minutes or until golden brown underneath and then carefully flip them over. Fry for another 5 - 7 minutes or until golden on the bottom and heated all the way through."]
'Chicken & sweet potato curry', ["1 tbsp sunflower oil","1 onion, chopped","450g boneless, skinless chicken thigh, cut into bite-sized pieces","165g jar korma paste","2 garlic cloves, crushed","500g sweet potato, cut into small chunks","400g can chopped tomato","100g baby spinach","basmati rice, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a pan, add the onion and cook over a low heat for about 5 mins until softened. Increase the heat slightly, add the chicken pieces and brown.","STEP 2","Stir in the curry paste and garlic, cooking for 2 mins before adding 100ml water, the sweet potatoes and chopped tomatoes. Simmer for 20-30 mins until the chicken is cooked through and the sweet potato is tender – add a splash more water if it starts to look dry. Season to taste and add the spinach, removing the pan from the heat and stirring until the spinach has wilted. Serve with basmati rice."]
'Sausage & squash risotto', ["3 large sweet potatoes (700g), scrubbed and cut into wedges","½ tbsp sunflower oil , plus a little extra","¼ large red cabbage","½ medium red onion , finely sliced","6 large cornichons , quartered","3 tbsp Greek yogurt or mayonnaise","25g dill , finely chopped","4 skinned  cod fillets (160g per fillet)","2 large eggs","100g fresh breadcrumbs"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. In a bowl, toss the wedges with the oil, 1 tsp salt and 1/4 tsp pepper. Transfer to a baking sheet and roast for 25-30 mins, turning halfway through. The wedges should be crisp and golden brown.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, make the slaw. Remove the cabbage’s white core and discard. Slice the leaves as finely as possible and put in a large mixing bowl with the onion and cornichons. In another bowl, combine the yogurt or mayonnaise with the dill and 2 tbsp of the cornichons’ pickling liquid. Mix the dressing with the other slaw ingredients until everything is well coated, then set aside.","STEP 3","Heat grill to high. Slice each cod fillet into two or three fingers. Beat the eggs lightly in a shallow bowl and tip the breadcrumbs into a separate bowl with a good pinch of salt and pepper. Dip each cod finger in the egg and then in the breadcrumbs, and place on an oiled baking sheet. Grill for 6-7 mins or until cooked through and golden. Serve with the crispy wedges and a generous helping of the dill pickle slaw."]
'Creamy chicken, squash & pecan pasta', ["1l chicken stock","½ butternut squash , peeled and chopped into small chunks","2 chicken breasts","400g pasta (we used casarecce)","50g cream cheese","75g pecans , chopped","small pack flat-leaf parsley , chopped","25g parmesan grated, plus extra to serve"], ["STEP 1","Pour the stock into a pan and bring to a simmer. Add the squash and chicken, cover and bubble gently for 15 mins, or until the chicken and squash are cooked. If the chicken cooks first, remove from the pan, set aside and keep boiling the squash until tender. Scoop the squash out with a slotted spoon, leaving just the stock in the pan.","STEP 2","Bring the stock back to the boil and add the pasta; the liquid should just cover the pasta. Cook, stirring regularly, until the pasta is just tender and most of the stock has been absorbed (top up with water if necessary). Shred the chicken.","STEP 3","Return the squash to the pan and add the cream cheese, pecans, parsley and parmesan. Simmer for another min or two, then add the chicken. Season and serve with extra parmesan, if you like."]
'Double bean & roasted pepper chilli', ["2 onions, chopped","2 celery sticks, finely chopped","2 yellow or orange peppers, finely chopped","2 tbsp sunflower oil or rapeseed oil","2 x 460g jars roasted red peppers","2 tsp chipotle paste","2 tbsp red wine vinegar","1 tbsp cocoa powder","1 tbsp dried oregano","1 tbsp sweet smoked paprika","2 tbsp ground cumin","1 tsp ground cinnamon","2 x 400g cans chopped tomatoes","400g can refried beans","3 x 400g cans kidney beans, drained and rinsed","2 x 400g cans  black beans, drained and rinsed"], ["STEP 1","Put the onions, celery and chopped peppers with the oil in your largest flameproof casserole dish or heavy-based saucepan, and fry gently over a low heat until soft but not coloured.","STEP 2","Drain both jars of peppers over a bowl to catch the juices. Put a quarter of the peppers into a food processor with the chipotle paste, vinegar, cocoa, dried spices and herbs. Whizz to a purée, then stir into the softened veg and cook for a few mins.","STEP 3","Add the tomatoes and refried beans with 1 can water and the reserved pepper juice. Simmer for 1 hr until thickened, smoky and the tomato chunks have broken down to a smoother sauce.","STEP 4","At this stage you can cool and chill the sauce if making ahead. Otherwise add the kidney and black beans, and the remaining roasted peppers, cut into bite-sized pieces, then reheat. (This makes a large batch, so once the sauce is ready it might be easier to split it between two pans when you add the beans and peppers.) Once bubbling and the beans are hot, season to taste and serve."]
'Orzo & tomato soup', ["2 tbsp olive oil","1 onion, chopped","2 celery sticks, chopped","2 garlic cloves, crushed","1 tbsp tomato purée","400g can chopped tomatoes","400g can chickpeas","150g orzo pasta","700ml vegetable stock","2 tbsp basil pesto","crusty bread, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat 1 tbsp olive oil in a large saucepan. Add the onion and celery and fry for 10-15 mins, or until starting to soften, then add the garlic and cook for 1 min more. Stir in all the other ingredients, except for the pesto and remaining oil, and bring to the boil.","STEP 2","Reduce the heat and leave to simmer for 6-8 mins, or until the orzo is tender. Season to taste, then ladle into bowls.","STEP 3","Stir the remaining oil with the pesto, then drizzle over the soup. Serve with chunks of crusty bread."]
'Quick tomato soup with cheesy garlic dippers', ["400g can cherry tomatoes","1 tbsp caster sugar","100ml vegetable stock","dash each Tabasco and Worcestershire sauce","2 tbsp mascarpone","few torn basil leaves (optional)","1 medium ciabatta roll, halved","1 garlic clove , halved","125g ball mozzarella cheese, shredded"], ["STEP 1","Put the tomatoes, sugar, stock and sauces into a medium pan with some salt and pepper. Bring to a simmer and cook for 5-10 mins. Stir in the mascarpone and blend to a smooth soup. Return to the pan and keep warm while you make the dippers.","STEP 2","Heat the grill to high and toast the ciabatta until golden. Rub with the garlic, season, then top with the cheese and grill until melted and golden. Slice into fingers and serve with the soup, sprinkled with the basil, if using."]
'Creamy chicken stew', ["3 leeks , halved and finely sliced","2 tbsp olive oil , plus extra if needed","1 tbsp butter","8 small chicken thighs","500ml chicken stock","1 tbsp Dijon mustard","75g crème fraîche","200g frozen peas","3 tbsp dried or fresh breadcrumbs","small bunch of parsley , finely chopped"], ["STEP 1","Tip the leeks and oil into a flameproof casserole dish on a low heat, add the butter and cook everything very gently for 10 mins or until the leeks are soft.","STEP 2","Put the chicken, skin-side down, in a large non-stick frying pan on a medium heat, cook until the skin browns, then turn and brown the other side. You shouldn’t need any oil but if the skin starts to stick, add a little. Add the chicken to the leeks, leaving behind any fat in the pan.","STEP 3","Add the stock to the dish and bring to a simmer, season well, cover and cook for 30 mins on low. Stir in the mustard, crème fraîche and peas and bring to a simmer. You should have quite a bit of sauce.","STEP 4","When you’re ready to serve, put the grill on. Mix the breadcrumbs and parsley, sprinkle them over the chicken and grill until browned."]
'Puttanesca meatball bake', ["1 tbsp olive oil","24 ready-made meatballs","2 garlic cloves, finely sliced","pinch dried chilli flakes (optional)","2 anchovies, chopped (optional)","2 small courgettes (about 250g), coarsely grated","2 tbsp capers, rinsed, drained and roughly chopped","70g pitted black olives, halved","500ml passata","300g penne (or other pasta shapes)","2 tbsp grated parmesan"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Heat the oil in a frying pan and gently fry the meatballs until they are browned all over, then tip them into a dish. Add the garlic and chilli, if using, to the leftover oil in the pan and cook it briefly along with the anchovies, if using. Fry until the anchovies almost melt, then add the courgettes and cook until any liquid they give off has evaporated. Stir in the capers, olives and passata and bring to a simmer. Add the meatballs and cook for 5 mins more, then season if needed.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, cook the pasta following pack instructions, drain well, then tip into an ovenproof baking dish about 25cm wide. Spoon over the meatball mixture, stir into the pasta and level the surface as much as possible. Sprinkle over the parmesan and bake for 30 mins, or until the top is browned a little and the sauce is bubbling. Rest for 5 mins before serving."]
'Easy beef stew with sweet potato topping', ["1 tbsp olive oil","1 onion, finely chopped","2 carrots, finely diced (about 130g)","1-2 sticks celery, finely diced (about 130g)","2 fat cloves garlic, crushed","400-500g braising steak","1 tsp ground cinnamon","1 low-salt beef stock cube","2 tbsp tomato purée","1 x 25g pack parsley, stalks and leaves finely chopped separately","1kg sweet potatoes, peeled and diced","knob of butter","handful grated cheddar"], ["STEP 1","Heat the olive oil in a heavy-based pan. Add the onions and cook for 2 mins, then add the carrot and celery and cook until softened. Add a little water if the mixture sticks.","STEP 2","Add the braising steak and cook until browned, then stir in the garlic and cinnamon and cook for a further 1 – 2 mins until the aromas are released.","STEP 3","Add the stock cube to 500ml boiling water and stir into the meat, along with the tomato purée and parsley stalks. Bring to the boil and simmer covered for 1 hour, then take off the lid and simmer for another hour or until the meat is very tender. Stir in the chopped parsley leaves.","STEP 4","Transfer the stew into a medium-sized ceramic dish (that would be big enough for four adults), or into 6 - 8 large ramekins for make-ahead toddler portions.","STEP 5","Meanwhile, steam or boil the sweet potatoes until tender. Preheat the oven to 200C/180C fan/gas mark 6. Drain the potatoes well and mash with the butter. Spoon on top of the meat, sprinkle with the cheese and cook on the top shelf for around 20 minutes until golden and bubbling.","STEP 6","Alternatively, cover and freeze the pie or mini pies for another time. Defrost thoroughly before cooking - you can do this by leaving it in the fridge overnight if you like. Preheat the oven to 200C/180C fan/gas mark 6 and cook for around 30 - 35 mins or until golden, bubbling and hot throughout."]
'Cheesy ham hock, spinach & ricotta lasagne', ["70g butter","70g plain flour","1l whole  milk","1 bay leaf","80g grated parmesan or gruyère","2 tsp Dijon mustard","pinch of  cayenne pepper","600g spinach","250g ricotta","1 whole  nutmeg , for grating","300g ham hock , shredded, or thick-cut ham, chopped","12 dried  lasagne sheets","50g grated  mozzarella"], ["STEP 1","Melt the butter in a pan until foaming, then stir in the flour to make a paste. Cook for 2 mins. Remove from the heat and gradually whisk in the milk. Add the bay leaf, return to the heat, and bring to a simmer. Cook for 4-5 mins, whisking continuously until thickened. Remove from the heat and whisk in 50g parmesan, the mustard and cayenne pepper. Season to taste.","STEP 2","Put the spinach in a large pan with 50ml boiling water, cover and leave for 2-3 mins to wilt. Drain and leave to cool. Put the spinach in a clean tea towel and squeeze out any excess water. Transfer to a food processor and pulse to roughly chop, then add the ricotta and pulse again to combine. Grate in some nutmeg, then season.","STEP 3","Heat the oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Remove the bay leaf from the sauce, then spoon a quarter\xa0into the bottom of a 24 x 28cm baking dish. Top with a third of the ricotta and spinach mixture,\xa0a third of the ham, then 4 lasagne sheets (overlap them slightly if needed). Repeat with the remaining ingredients, finishing with a layer of sauce. Top with the remaining parmesan and the mozzarella. Bake for 45-50 mins or until golden, covering halfway through if it’s starting to brown."]
'Sausage, sweet potato & sweetcorn bake', ["2 tbsp rapeseed oil","300g sweet potatoes , peeled and cut into wedges","2 corn on the cob , each cut into 3","pinch chilli or barbecue spices (use more if you all like spice)","12 chipolata sausages","1 tbsp grated parmesan","barbecue sauce , to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Put 1 tbsp oil in a bowl, tip in the wedges and toss them in the oil along with some seasoning. Arrange them in the centre of a large baking tray. Tip the corn into the bowl with the remaining oil and some seasoning, and arrange them on one side of the wedges. Sprinkle some chilli or spices on one half of the wedges (do the whole lot if everyone likes spices). Arrange the sausages on the empty third of the tray.","STEP 2","Put the tray in the oven and cook for 40 mins, turning the sausages and corn over halfway through. Take the tray out of the oven and sprinkle the parmesan over the corn, put it back in the oven and cook for 10 mins. Serve with the barbecue sauce."]
'Spinach & ricotta cannelloni', ["3 tbsp olive oil","8 garlic cloves, crushed","3 tbsp caster sugar","2 tbsp red wine vinegar","4 x 400g cans chopped tomatoes","small bunch basil leaves","2 x 250g tubs mascarpone","3 tbsp milk","85g parmesan (or vegetarian alternative), grated","2 x 125g balls mozzarella, sliced","1kg spinach","100g parmesan (or vegetarian alternative), grated","3 x 250g tubs ricotta","large pinch grated nutmeg","400g dried cannelloni"], ["STEP 1","First make the tomato sauce. Heat the oil in a large pan and fry the garlic for 1 min. Add the sugar, vinegar, tomatoes and some seasoning and simmer for 20 mins, stirring occasionally, until thick. Add the basil and divide the sauce between 2 or more shallow ovenproof dishes (see Tips for freezing, below). Set aside. Make a sauce by beating the mascarpone with the milk until smooth, season, then set aside.","STEP 2","Put the spinach in a large colander and pour over a kettle of boiling water to wilt it (you may need to do this in batches). When cool enough to handle squeeze out the excess water. Roughly chop the spinach and mix in a large bowl with 100g Parmesan and ricotta. Season well with salt, pepper and the nutmeg.","STEP 3","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Using a piping bag or plastic food bag with the corner snipped off, squeeze the filling into the cannelloni tubes. Lay the tubes, side by side, on top of the tomato sauce and spoon over the mascarpone sauce. Top with Parmesan and mozzarella. You can now freeze the cannelloni, uncooked, or you can cook it first and then freeze. Bake for 30-35 mins until golden and bubbling. Remove from oven and let stand for 5 mins before serving."]
'Pizza Margherita in 4 easy steps', ["300g strong bread flour","1 tsp instant yeast (from a sachet or a tub)","1 tsp salt","1 tbsp olive oil, plus extra for drizzling","100ml passata","handful fresh basil or 1 tsp dried","1 garlic clove, crushed","125g ball mozzarella, sliced","handful grated or shaved parmesan (or vegetarian alternative)","handful of cherry tomatoes, halved","handful of basil leaves (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Make the base: Put the flour into a large bowl, then stir in the yeast and salt. Make a well, pour in 200ml warm water and the olive oil and bring together with a wooden spoon until you have a soft, fairly wet dough. Turn onto a lightly floured surface and knead for 5 mins until smooth. Cover with a tea towel and set aside. You can leave the dough to rise if you like, but it’s not essential for a thin crust.","STEP 2","Make the sauce: Mix the passata, basil and crushed garlic together, then season to taste. Leave to stand at room temperature while you get on with shaping the base.","STEP 3","Roll out the dough: if you’ve let the dough rise, give it a quick knead, then split into two balls. On a floured surface, roll out the dough into large rounds, about 25cm across, using a rolling pin. The dough needs to be very thin as it will rise in the oven. Lift the rounds onto two floured baking sheets.","STEP 4","Top and bake: heat the oven to 240C/220C fan/gas 8. Put another baking sheet or an upturned baking tray in the oven on the top shelf. Smooth sauce over bases with the back of a spoon. Scatter with cheese and tomatoes, drizzle with olive oil and season. Put one pizza, still on its baking sheet, on top of the preheated sheet or tray. Bake for 8-10 mins until crisp. Serve with a little more olive oil, and basil leaves if using. Repeat step for remaining pizza."]
'Meatballs with creamy mushrooms & mash', ["600g floury  potatoes , such as Maris Piper or King Edwards","50g butter","50ml milk","500g pork or  turkey mince (10% fat)","20g grated  parmesan","1 apple , peeled, cored and grated","2 tbsp olive oil","1 onion , chopped","2 garlic cloves","300g mushrooms , sliced","small bunch of  thyme , leaves picked","200g half-fat crème fraîche","300g peas or green beans"], ["STEP 1","Cook the potatoes in a large pan of boiling water for 15 mins until tender. Drain, return to the pan,\xa0add the butter, milk and season, then mash until smooth. Keep warm until you’re ready to serve.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, combine the mince, parmesan, grated apple and some seasoning. Shape the mixture into ping-pong-ball-sized meatballs. Heat half the oil in a wide pan over a medium heat. Fry the meatballs for a few minutes, stirring, until golden all over. Transfer to a plate.","STEP 3","Heat the remaining oil in the pan, and fry the onion for 8-10 mins until soft and translucent. Add the garlic, mushrooms and thyme, then season and fry for 10 mins more until the mushrooms are soft and most of the liquid has evaporated. Stir in the crème fraîche.","STEP 4","Cook the peas or green beans in a pan of boiling water for a few minutes until tender. Drain and leave to steam-dry. Stir the meatballs through the sauce and cook for 1-2 mins until hot and cooked through, then season. If you want to make the meatballs ahead, leave to cool. Will keep chilled for up to a day. Reheat thoroughly. Serve alongside the mash and veg."]
'Chicken pasta bake', ["4 tbsp olive oil","1 onion , finely chopped","2 garlic cloves , crushed","¼ tsp chilli flakes","2 x 400g cans chopped tomatoes","1 tsp caster sugar","6 tbsp mascarpone","4 skinless chicken breasts, sliced into strips","300g penne","70g mature cheddar , grated","50g grated mozzarella","½ small bunch of parsley , finely chopped"], ["STEP 1","Heat 2 tbsp of the oil in a pan over a medium heat and fry the onion gently for 10-12 mins. Add the garlic and chilli flakes and cook for 1 min. Tip in the tomatoes and sugar and season to taste. Simmer uncovered for 20 mins or until thickened, then stir through the mascarpone.","STEP 2","Heat 1 tbsp of oil in a non-stick frying pan. Season the chicken and fry for 5-7 mins or until the chicken is cooked through.","STEP 3","Heat the oven to 220C/200C fan/gas 7. Cook the penne following pack\xa0instructions. Drain and toss with the remaining oil. Tip the pasta into a medium sized ovenproof dish. Stir in\xa0the chicken and pour over the sauce. Top with the cheddar, mozzarella\xa0and parsley. Bake for 20 mins or until golden brown and bubbling."]
'Creamy courgette lasagne', ["9 dried lasagne  sheets","1 tbsp sunflower oil","1 onion, finely chopped","700g courgette (about 6), coarsely grated","2 garlic cloves, crushed","250g tub ricotta","50g cheddar","350g jar tomato sauce  for pasta"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 220C/fan 200C/gas 7. Put a pan of water on to boil, then cook the lasagne sheets for about 5 mins until softened, but not cooked through. Rinse in cold water, then drizzle with a little oil to stop them sticking together.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, heat the oil in a large frying pan, then fry the onion. After 3 mins, add the courgettes and garlic and continue to fry until the courgette has softened and turned bright green. Stir in 2/3 of both the ricotta and the cheddar, then season to taste. Heat the tomato sauce in the microwave for 2 mins on High until hot.","STEP 3","In a large baking dish, layer up the lasagne, starting with half the courgette mix, then pasta, then tomato sauce. Repeat, top with blobs of the remaining ricotta, then scatter with the rest of the cheddar. Bake on the top shelf for about 10 mins until the pasta is tender and the cheese is golden."]
'Slow-cooker chicken casserole', ["knob of butter","½ tbsp rapeseed or olive oil","1 large onion, finely chopped","1 ½ tbsp flour","650g boneless, skinless chicken thigh fillets","3 garlic cloves, crushed","400g baby new potatoes, halved","2 sticks celery, diced","2 carrots, diced","250g mushrooms, quartered","15g dried porcini mushroom, soaked in 50ml boiling water","500ml stock made with 2 very low salt  chicken stock cubes (we used Kallo)","2 tsp Dijon mustard, plus extra to serve","2 bay leaves"], ["STEP 1","Heat a knob of butter and ½ tbsp rapeseed or olive oil in a large frying pan, cook 1 finely chopped large onion for 8-10 mins until softened and starting to caramelise.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, put 1 ½ tbsp flour and a little salt and pepper in a bowl and toss 650g boneless, skinless chicken thigh fillets in it.","STEP 3","Add 3 crushed garlic cloves and the chicken to the pan and cook for 4-5 mins more until the chicken is starting to brown.","STEP 4","Transfer to your slow cooker, along with 400g halved baby new potatoes, 2 diced celery sticks, 2 diced carrots, 250g quartered mushrooms, 15g dried and soaked porcini mushrooms with the 50ml soaking liquid, 500ml chicken stock, 2 tsp Dijon mustard and 2 bay leaves.","STEP 5","Give it a good stir. Cook on Low for 7 hours or High for 4 hours.","STEP 6","Remove the bay leaves and serve with a little Dijon mustard on the side."]
'Easy classic lasagne', ["1 tbsp olive oil","2 rashers smoked streaky bacon","1 onion , finely chopped","1 celery stick, finely chopped","1 medium carrot , grated","2 garlic cloves , finely chopped","500g beef mince","1 tbsp tomato purée","2 x 400g cans chopped tomatoes","1 tbsp clear honey","500g pack fresh egg lasagne sheets","400ml crème fraîche","125g ball mozzarella , roughly torn","50g freshly grated parmesan","large handful basil leaves , torn (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a large saucepan. Use kitchen scissors to snip the bacon into small pieces, or use a sharp knife to chop it on a chopping board. Add the bacon to the pan and cook for just a few mins until starting to turn golden. Add the onion, celery and carrot, and cook over a medium heat for 5 mins, stirring occasionally, until softened.","STEP 2","Add the garlic and cook for 1 min, then tip in the mince and cook, stirring and breaking it up with a wooden spoon, for about 6 mins until browned all over.","STEP 3","Stir in the tomato purée and cook for 1 min, mixing in well with the beef and vegetables. Tip in the chopped tomatoes. Fill each can half full with water to rinse out any tomatoes left in the can, and add to the pan. Add the honey and season to taste. Simmer for 20 mins.","STEP 4","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. To assemble the lasagne, ladle a little of the ragu sauce into the bottom of the roasting tin or casserole dish, spreading the sauce all over the base. Place 2 sheets of lasagne on top of the sauce overlapping to make it fit, then repeat with more sauce and another layer of pasta. Repeat with a further 2 layers of sauce and pasta, finishing with a layer of pasta.","STEP 5","Put the crème fraîche in a bowl and mix with 2 tbsp water to loosen it and make a smooth pourable sauce. Pour this over the top of the pasta, then top with the mozzarella. Sprinkle Parmesan over the top and bake for 25–30 mins until golden and bubbling. Serve scattered with basil, if you like."]
'Creamy ham, leek & mushroom spaghetti', ["2 tsp olive oil","2 medium leeks, thinly sliced","200g chestnut mushroom, sliced","2 garlic cloves, crushed","300g spaghetti","140g low-fat soft cheese (we used Philadelphia Light)","85g wafer-thin smoked ham, shredded","small pack basil","25g grated parmesan"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a large saucepan. Stir in the leeks, 2 tbsp water and some seasoning, cover, then cook for 5 mins over a medium heat until softened. Add the mushrooms and garlic, then cook for 3 mins more. Meanwhile, cook the spaghetti according to pack instructions, then drain, reserving a little of the cooking liquid.","STEP 2","Stir the soft cheese into the leek and mushroom mixture, adding enough of the reserved pasta liquid to give a sauce-like consistency. Add the ham, basil leaves and Parmesan, then toss in the spaghetti."]
'Help-yourself tuna rice salad', ["approx 900g/2lb cold cooked rice (about 400g/14oz uncooked rice)","400g tuna in springwater","200g frozen petits pois , defrosted","2 red peppers , peeled with a potato peeler, deseeded and diced","3 tomatoes , chopped into small chunks","5 spring onions , finely sliced","bunch flat-leaf parsley , chopped","large handful stoned green olives , roughly chopped (optional)","4 tbsp mayonnaise","juice 1 lemon","2 tbsp extra-virgin olive oil"], ["STEP 1","The cooked rice will have probably clumped together, so break it up in a large mixing bowl. Flake in the tuna, then mix in the peas, peppers, tomatoes, spring onions, parsley and olives, if you’re using them.","STEP 2","Stir through the mayonnaise, lemon juice and olive oil and season to taste. Cover the bowl with cling film or place in a large plastic container and let your household serve themselves whenever they are hungry."]
'Oven-baked sweet potato fajitas', ["2 large sweet potatoes","1 onion","2 red onions","1 large  red pepper , deseeded","1 tbsp vegetable oil","2 tbsp cider or  white wine vinegar","30g sachet  fajita seasoning","8 small  tortilla wraps","½ small pack  coriander , chopped","½ small pot low-fat soured cream","small iceberg lettuce , shredded","100g reduced-fat feta cheese , crumbled"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Chop the veg into chunky wedges and toss in a large bowl with the oil, vinegar and fajita seasoning. Arrange in a single layer on a large baking tray and cook for 40 mins, turning halfway through.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, warm the wraps following pack instructions. Once the veg is cooked, sprinkle with coriander, then roll up in the wraps with a dollop of soured cream, some lettuce and crumbled feta on top."]
'Swedish meatball burgers', ["500g lean beef or pork mince","1 onion , coarsely grated","1 egg , beaten","25g dried breadcrumbs","grated nutmeg","¼ tsp garlic powder","burger buns , sliced cheese, lettuce, sliced tomato and lingonberry sauce (optional), to serve"], ["STEP 1","Tip the mince, onion, egg, breadcrumbs, nutmeg and garlic powder into a large bowl and generously season with black pepper. Mix everything together using your hands, then shape the mixture into six patties. Transfer to a plate, cover and chill for 1 hr or up to a day.","STEP 2","Heat a barbecue to medium or until a thin layer of coals has turned grey. Cook the burgers for 10 mins, turning occasionally, until lightly charred and cooked through. Top with sliced cheese during the final 2 mins of cooking time, if you like.","STEP 3","Serve the burgers in the buns topped with the lettuce, tomato and lingonberry sauce, if you like."]
'Cauliflower cheese', ["1 large cauliflower (leaves cut off), broken into pieces","500ml milk","4 tbsp flour","50g butter","100g strong cheddar, grated","2-3 tbsp breadcrumbs, if you have them"], ["STEP 1","Bring a large saucepan of water to the boil, then add 1 large cauliflower, broken into pieces, and cook for 5 mins – lift out a piece to test, it should be cooked.","STEP 2","Drain\xa0the cauliflower, then tip into an ovenproof dish. Heat oven to 220C/200C/gas 7.","STEP 3","Put the saucepan back on the heat and add 500ml milk, 4 tbsp flour and 50g butter.","STEP 4","Keep\xa0whisking\xa0fast as the butter melts and the mixture comes to the boil – the flour will disappear and the sauce will begin to thicken. Whisk for 2 mins while the sauce bubbles and becomes nice and thick.","STEP 5","Turn off the heat, stir in most of the 100g grated cheddar cheese and pour over the cauliflower. Scatter over the remaining cheese, and 2-3 tbsp breadcrumbs if using.","STEP 6","Put in the oven and bake for 20 mins until bubbling."]
'Teriyaki salmon & green beans', ["4 salmon fillets (or a 500g piece to cut up yourself)","100g green beans , ends trimmed","1 lemon , cut into wedges","2 tbsp low-salt soy sauce","1 tbsp honey","1 tbsp mirin","1 garlic clove , crushed","noodles or rice, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. If you have a whole piece of salmon, cut it into four fillets. Place a sheet of baking parchment on a baking tray and lay the salmon diagonally across it.","STEP 2","Cook the beans in boiling water for 1 min and drain. Arrange the beans in piles around the salmon and add the lemon wedges to the baking tray. Mix the soy sauce, honey, mirin and garlic, and pour half of it over the beans and salmon.","STEP 3","Cook for 15 mins, then pour the rest of the sauce over the salmon. Cook for another 5 mins. Squeeze over the lemon and serve with noodles or rice."]
'Easy meatloaf with spaghetti & tomato sauce', ["2 tbsp olive oil , plus extra for greasing and drizzling","2 onions , finely chopped","500g pork mince","1 large egg","75g fresh breadcrumbs","15 sage leaves , roughly chopped","100g feta , crumbled","3 bay leaves , 1 finely chopped","680g jar passata","600g spaghetti"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160 fan/gas 4 and grease an ovenproof dish. Heat the oil in a large frying pan over a medium heat, add the onions, sizzle for 5 mins, then remove half and put in a large bowl with the mince, egg, breadcrumbs, sage, feta\xa0and chopped bay. Season well and mix. Shape into a long sausage shape and transfer to the greased dish. Put the remaining bay leaves on top, drizzle with a little more oil and put in the oven for 40-45 mins until cooked through.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, keep the remaining onions on a low heat in the pan. Cook for 2 mins, then increase the heat and pour in the passata with 70ml water. Bubble for 30 mins on a low heat, stirring often, or until the meatloaf is ready to come out of the oven. Season to taste.","STEP 3","Cook the spaghetti following pack instructions. When everything is ready, toss the spaghetti in the tomato sauce, slice the meatloaf and let everyone help themselves."]
'Toddler recipe: Microwave courgette and pea risotto with prawns', ["200g risotto rice","1 large garlic clove , crushed","2 spring onions , finely sliced","900ml low-salt chicken stock (we used gluten-free Kallo, see tips below)","120g frozen peas","1 large courgette , diced (see tips below)","50g grated medium or mature cheddar , plus extra to serve","140g cooked prawns (or chicken)"], ["STEP 1","Put the rice, garlic and spring onions into a large microwaveable bowl, then pour in 400ml stock. Cover with cling film and microwave on High for 10 mins. Stir the rice, then add another 250ml of the remaining stock, cover and microwave on High again for 3 mins.","STEP 2","Stir the rice again, then add the frozen peas, courgette and the rest of the stock. Cover and microwave on the same setting for a further 8 mins. Stir in the cheese and prawns (or chicken\xa0if you prefer), then leave the risotto to stand for 2 mins. Scatter with more cheese and serve."]
'Cheesy sprout pasta bake', ["200g Brussels sprouts , halved","1 tbsp olive oil","1 tbsp balsamic vinegar","350g penne pasta","2 tbsp butter","1 garlic clove , crushed","3 tbsp plain flour","500ml milk","2 tsp wholegrain mustard","200g mature cheddar , grated","green salad leaves , to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Toss the sprouts in the oil and vinegar, then tip into a roasting tin. Bake for 10-15 mins, tossing again halfway through.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, cook the pasta until it has a slight bite (around two minutes less than pack instructions), then drain and set aside.","STEP 3","Heat the butter in a pan. Add the garlic and flour and cook for 1-2 mins. Gradually add the milk until the mixture is smooth, then simmer for 5 mins until thick.","STEP 4","Remove from the heat and add the mustard and most of the cheese, reserving one handful for the topping. Season well and stir. Add the pasta, then tip the mixture into a large baking dish. Top with the roasted sprouts and reserved cheese and bake for 20 mins until the cheese topping is golden and bubbling. Serve with a green salad, if you like."]
'Lemony chicken stew with giant couscous', ["1 tbsp olive oil","2 onions, chopped","500g skinless boneless chicken thighs, each cut into 2-3 chunks","3 tbsp tagine paste or 2 tbsp ras el hanout","2 x 400g cans tomato with chopped mixed olives","small handful fresh oregano, leaves picked and chopped","2 preserved lemons, flesh removed, skin rinsed and finely chopped","2 tbsp clear honey","1 chicken stock cube","200g giant couscous","handful parsley, chopped"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a large flameproof casserole dish with a lid. Add the onions and cook for 10 mins until starting to caramelise. Push the onions to one side of the dish and add the chicken. Cook over a high heat for 5 mins or so until the chicken is browning.","STEP 2","Add the tagine paste, tomatoes, oregano, preserved lemons and honey, and crumble in the stock cube. Fill one of the tomato cans halfway with water and pour this into the dish. Season with a little salt and plenty of black pepper. Give everything a good stir, then cover with a lid and simmer for 40 mins, on a gentle bubble, or for up to 4 hrs over a very low heat if you’re eating at different times.","STEP 3","Add the couscous 10 mins before you’re ready to serve, cover and simmer for 10 mins or until cooked. If you’re eating at different times, scoop your portion into a pan, add 50g couscous and cook in the same way. Stir in some parsley just before serving."]
'Easy chicken fajitas', ["2 large chicken breasts, finely sliced","1 red onion, finely sliced","1 red pepper, sliced","1 red chilli, finely sliced (optional)","1 heaped tbsp smoked paprika","1 tbsp ground coriander","pinch of  ground cumin","2 medium  garlic cloves, crushed","4 tbsp olive oil","1 lime, juiced","4-5 drops Tabasco","6 medium tortillas","bag mixed salad","230g tub fresh salsa"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6 and wrap 6 medium tortillas in foil.","STEP 2","Mix 1 heaped tbsp smoked paprika, 1 tbsp ground coriander, a pinch of ground cumin, 2 crushed garlic cloves, 4 tbsp olive oil, the juice of 1 lime and 4-5 drops Tabasco together in a bowl with a big pinch each of salt and pepper.","STEP 3","Stir 2 finely sliced chicken breasts, 1 finely sliced red onion, 1 sliced red pepper and 1 finely sliced red chilli, if using, into the marinade.","STEP 4","Heat a griddle pan until smoking hot and\xa0add the chicken and marinade to the pan.","STEP 5","Keep everything moving over a high heat for about 5 mins using tongs until you get a nice charred effect. If your griddle pan is small you may need to do this in two batches.","STEP 6","To check the chicken is cooked, find the thickest part and tear in half – if any part is still raw cook until done.","STEP 7","Put the tortillas in the oven to heat up and serve with the cooked chicken, a bag of mixed salad and one 230g tub of fresh salsa."]
'Turkey bolognese pasta bake', ["1 tbsp olive oil","2 onions, finely chopped","500g turkey mince (thigh is best)","1 garlic clove, crushed","2 x 400g cans chopped tomatoes","1 tbsp chipotle paste","300ml chicken stock","400g large pasta shells","250g tub mascarpone","200g cheddar, grated","2 tbsp grated parmesan"], ["STEP 1","Heat the olive oil in a large pan. Add the onions and cook for 8-10 mins until softened. Add the mince and brown all over. Once browned, add the garlic, tomatoes, chipotle paste and chicken stock, and bring to the boil. Turn down to a simmer and cook, uncovered, for 35-40 mins, adding a splash of water if it looks too dry.","STEP 2","While the turkey cooks, boil the pasta following pack instructions, then drain, reserving some of the water. Warm through the mascarpone with a splash of the hot pasta water over a low heat. Add 140g cheddar, season and stir to combine.","STEP 3","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Transfer the turkey sauce to a large baking dish. Stir the cheese sauce through the pasta and pour over the mince. Sprinkle the remaining cheddar and the parmesan on top. Bake in the oven for 20 mins or until golden and crisping at the edges."]
'Slow cooker chilli', ["1 tbsp rapeseed oil","1 large onion, finely chopped","2 garlic cloves, crushed","2 tsp ground cumin","1 ½ tsp sweet smoked paprika","1 tsp mild chilli powder (optional)","2 carrots , diced","2 sticks celery, diced","1 courgette, diced","1 red pepper, diced","400g lean beef mince","3 x 400g cans chopped tomatoes","1 beef stock cube","1 tbsp tomato purée","1 x 400g can green lentils, drained and rinsed","1 x 400g can flageolet beans, drained and rinsed","a selection of the following to serve: rice or tacos, soured cream, grated cheese and sliced avocado"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil\xa0in a heavy-based pan. Cook the onion for 10 mins until softened and starting to caramelise. Add the garlic and spices and cook for a further 1-2 mins.","STEP 2","Transfer to a slow cooker, along with the diced vegetables, mince, chopped tomatoes, stock cube and tomato purée. Stir well. Cook on low for 6-7 hours. About half an hour before serving, take off the lid and use a stick blender to blend in the vegetables (if your\xa0children aren’t keen to eat veg) or leave chunky. Stir through the lentils and flageolet beans. Replace the lid and heat through for a further half hour. Stir and serve with rice or tacos, soured cream, grated cheese and sliced avocado."]
'Pull-apart pork with honey chipotle', ["1.2kg trimmed pork shoulder joint (weight after cutting away the rind - ask your butcher to do this)","75g ketchup , plus 1tbsp","3 tbsp chipotle paste","3 tbsp honey","1 tbsp red wine vinegar"], ["STEP 1","Up to two days before (and at least 2 hrs ahead), mix together 75g ketchup with 2 tbsp chipotle, 2 tbsp honey and the vinegar. Rub all over the pork and leave in a food bag (or bowl) in the fridge to marinate, turning occasionally.","STEP 2","Heat oven to 160C/140C fan/gas 3. Lift the pork into a snug-fitting roasting tin and baste with any excess marinade, plus 100ml water. Cover with foil, ensuring the pork is sealed in but the foil isn’t touching it, and bake for 4 hrs.","STEP 3","Turn up the oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6 (or cool and chill the pork, if making ahead). Remove the foil and put the pork back in for 30 mins until crisp and sticky on the outside.","STEP 4","Lift the pork from the tin and use two forks to shred the meat. Mix together the extra 1 tbsp ketchup with the remaining chipotle and honey, and stir it through the shredded meat with some seasoning before serving."]
'Spiced koftas with honey & chickpeas', ["1 ½ tsp fennel seeds","500g lamb mince","1 ½ tbsp ras el hanout","2 tbsp pine nuts , toasted and roughly chopped","2 x 400g cans chickpeas , drained and rinsed","2 tbsp olive oil","2 tbsp honey","80g Greek yogurt","2 tbsp tahini","1 lemon , 1/2 juiced, 1/2 cut into wedges to serve","25g parsley , roughly chopped, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Using a pestle and morter, crush the fennel seeds. In a large bowl, combine the crushed seeds, lamb, ras el hanout and pine nuts, and season well. Divide the mixture into eight equal egg-shaped koftas.","STEP 2","Tip the chickpeas into an ovenproof dish, season to taste and put in the oven while you fry the koftas. Heat 1 tbsp of the oil in a frying pan over a medium heat. Add the koftas and gently fry for 5 mins, turning from time to time, until evenly browned. Remove from the pan with a slotted spoon and set aside on a plate.","STEP 3","Remove the chickpeas from the oven, add the koftas to the dish, then pour over the rest of the oil and the honey, and return to the oven for 15 mins.","STEP 4","In a bowl, combine the yogurt, tahini and lemon juice with 70-100ml water and season well. Serve the koftas and chickpeas topped with parsley and a good drizzle of the creamy dressing, with the lemon wedges on the side."]
'One-pan chicken couscous', ["1 tbsp olive oil","1 onion, thinly sliced","200g chicken breast, diced","good chunk  fresh root ginger","1-2 tbsp  harissa paste, plus extra to serve","10 dried apricots","220g can  chickpeas, rinsed and drained","200g couscous","200ml hot chicken stock","handful  coriander, chopped, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat the olive oil in a large frying pan and cook the onion for 1-2 mins just until softened. Add the chicken and fry for 7-10 mins until cooked through and the onions have turned golden. Grate over the ginger, stir through the harissa to coat everything and cook for 1 min more.","STEP 2","Tip in the apricots, chickpeas and couscous, then pour over the stock and stir once. Cover with a lid or tightly cover the pan with foil and leave for about 5 mins until the couscous has soaked up all the stock and is soft. Fluff up the couscous with a fork and scatter over the coriander to serve. Serve with extra harissa, if you like."]
'Fish pie mac ’n’ cheese', ["650ml milk","40g plain flour","40g butter","2 tsp Dijon mustard","150g mature  cheddar , grated","180g frozen peas","handful of  parsley , chopped","300g macaroni","300g fish pie mix (smoked fish, white fish and salmon)","green salad , to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Pour the milk into a large pan and add the flour and butter. Set over a medium heat and whisk continuously until you have a smooth, thick white sauce. Remove from the heat, add the mustard, most of the cheese (save a handful for the top), peas and parsley.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, boil the pasta in a large pan of water following pack instructions until just cooked. Drain.","STEP 3","Heat the oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Tip the pasta into the sauce and add half the fish, stir everything together then tip into a large baking dish. Top with the rest of the fish, pushing it into the pasta a little, then scatter with the remaining cheese. Bake for 30 mins until golden, then serve with salad, if you like. Can be chilled and eaten within three days or frozen for up to a month. Defrost in the fridge, then reheat in a microwave or oven until piping hot."]
'Cauliflower & bacon pasta', ["200g streaky bacon","300g dried pasta","1 cauliflower , cut into large florets","25g butter","25g plain flour","300ml milk","1 tsp Dijon mustard","140g cheddar , grated","1 soft wholemeal roll , whizzed to breadcrumbs","salad , to serve, (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat the grill to high and bring a large pan of salted water to the boil. Grill the bacon slices for 5 mins or until crispy, then drain on kitchen paper and cut into small pieces.","STEP 2","Cook the pasta following pack instructions. Add the cauliflower to the pasta pan for the final 8 mins, so that it is just tender, then drain, reserving 2 tbsp of the cooking water.","STEP 3","Melt the butter in a small pan over a low heat, then stir in the flour and cook for a couple of mins. Gradually stir in the milk, mixing well between each addition. Bring to a simmer, then cook for a few mins until thickened. Season, add the mustard and half the grated cheese. Stir until the cheese has melted and the sauce is smooth.","STEP 4","Tip the pasta and cauliflower back into the pan along with the reserved cooking water. Stir through the cheese sauce and bacon, then transfer the mix to a baking dish. Mix together the breadcrumbs and remaining cheese, then sprinkle over the pasta. Cook for 5 mins under the grill until browned. Serve with a salad, if you like."]
'Classic meatloaf with tomato sauce', ["1 tbsp olive oil","1 onion, finely chopped","1 garlic clove, crushed","2 tbsp tomato purée","500g beef mince","1 egg","85g fresh breadcrumbs","1 tbsp olive oil","1 onion, finely chopped","1 carrot, finely chopped","1 celery stick, finely chopped","1 garlic clove, finely chopped","500ml passata with basil","peas and mash, to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a frying pan and add the onion, cook for 4-5 mins over a low heat, then stir in the garlic. Leave to cool completely.","STEP 2","To make the tomato sauce, heat the oil in a saucepan and fry the onion, carrot and celery for 3-4 mins, then add the garlic and cook for a minute. Add the passata and bring to a simmer, then season and cook for 5 mins.","STEP 3","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Mix the cooled onion with the tomato purée, mince, egg and breadcrumbs, and season. Line a 900g loaf tin with a liner or baking parchment and pack in the meatloaf mixture. Cook for 20-25 mins or until a skewer poked into the centre feels roasting hot when pulled out. Leave to rest for 10 mins before lifting out of the tin.","STEP 4","Serve slices of the meatloaf with some tomato sauce spooned over. Wrap any remaining meatloaf and use it as a sandwich filling for a lunchbox. Can be frozen for up to a month."]
'Lighter spaghetti & meatballs', ["1 tsp rapeseed oil","280g spaghetti","200g green lentils (well drained weight from a 400g can)","250g lean minced pork (max 8% fat)","½ tsp finely chopped rosemary","½ tsp Dijon mustard","1 garlic clove , crushed","1 tbsp rapeseed oil","2 shallots , finely chopped","2 garlic cloves , finely chopped","500g cherry tomatoes , preferably on the vine, halved","2 tsp tomato purée","pinch of chilli flakes","2 tbsp chopped oregano , plus a few chopped leaves to garnish"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Line a baking sheet with foil and brush with 1 tsp oil. Mash the lentils in a bowl with the back of a fork to break down a bit, but not completely. Stir in the pork, rosemary, mustard, garlic, some pepper to generously season, and mix well with the fork to distribute the lentils evenly. Divide the mixture into 4. Form each quarter into 5 small balls – to give you 20 in total – squeezing the mixture together well as you shape it. Lay the meatballs on the foil and roll them around in the oil to coat all over. Bake for 15 mins until cooked and lightly browned. Remove (leave the oven on) and set aside.","STEP 2","While the meatballs cook, heat 2 tsp of the oil for the sauce in a large non-stick frying pan. Tip in the shallots and garlic, and fry on a medium heat for 3-4 mins until softened and tinged brown. Pour in the remaining 1 tsp oil, lay the tomatoes in the pan so most of them are cut-side down (to help release the juices), raise the heat and fry them for 3-4 mins or until the tomatoes are starting to soften and release their juices. Don’t stir, or they may lose their shape. Splash in 125-150ml water so it all bubbles, and gently mix in the tomato purée. Lower the heat and simmer for 2 mins to create a juicy, chunky sauce. Season with the chilli flakes, oregano, pepper and a pinch of salt, and give it a quick stir, adding a drop more water if needed – you want it thick enough to coat the meatballs.","STEP 3","Pour the sauce into a casserole dish, add the meatballs and spoon the sauce over them to coat. Cover with foil and bake for 10 mins while you cook the spaghetti.","STEP 4","Boil a large saucepan of water. Add the spaghetti, stir and bring back to the boil. Cook for 10-12 mins, or following pack instructions, until al dente. Drain well, season with pepper and serve with the meatballs, sauce and a light sprinkling of oregano."]
'Easy fish pie recipe', ["1kg Maris Piper potatoes, peeled and halved","400ml milk, plus a splash","25g butter, plus a knob","25g plain flour","4 spring onions, finely sliced","1 x pack fish pie mix (cod, salmon, smoked haddock etc, weight around 320g-400g depending on pack size)","1 tsp Dijon or English mustard","½ a 25g pack or a small bunch chives, finely snipped","handful frozen sweetcorn","handful  frozen petits pois","handful grated cheddar"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 200C/fan 180C/gas mark 6.","STEP 2","Put 1kg potatoes, peeled and halved,\xa0in a\xa0saucepan and pour over enough water to cover them. Bring to the boil and then simmer until tender.","STEP 3","When cooked,\xa0drain\xa0thoroughly and mash with a splash of milk and a knob of butter. Season with ground black pepper.","STEP 4","Put 25g butter, 25g plain flour and 4 finely sliced spring onions in another pan and heat gently until the butter has melted, stirring regularly. Cook for 1-2 mins.","STEP 5","Gradually\xa0whisk in 400ml milk using a balloon whisk if you have one. Bring to the boil, stirring to avoid any lumps and sticking at the bottom of the pan. Cook for 3-4 mins until thickened.","STEP 6","Take off the heat and stir in 320g-400g mixed fish, 1 tsp Dijon or English mustard, a small bunch of finely snipped chives, handful of sweetcorn and handful of petits pois. Spoon into an\xa0ovenproof dish or 6-8 ramekins.","STEP 7","Spoon the potato on top and sprinkle with a handful of grated cheddar cheese.","STEP 8","Pop in the oven for 20-25 mins or until golden and bubbling at the edges. Alternatively, cover and freeze the pie or mini pies for another time."]
'Sausage & squash risotto', ["350g pack ready-chopped butternut squash , or half a medium squash, peeled and chopped","2 low-sodium chicken stock cubes","2 tsp olive oil","6 good-quality sausages , meat squeezed from the skins and rolled into mini meatballs","1 large onion , finely chopped","2 garlic cloves , crushed","6-8 thyme sprigs , leaves picked and chopped","½ tsp turmeric","200g risotto rice","25g parmesan , grated, plus a little to serve"], ["STEP 1","Boil the kettle. Put the squash in a heatproof bowl, add a splash of water and cover with cling film. Microwave on High for 8-10 mins or until the squash is tender. Meanwhile, crumble the stock cubes into a pan, add 1.2 litres hot water from the kettle and set over a low heat to simmer gently.","STEP 2","Heat the oil in a large, high-sided frying pan. Add the sausage meatballs and roll them around in the pan for 5-10 mins until browned all over and cooked through. Remove from the pan and set aside. Add the onion and sizzle gently for 5 mins, then add the garlic and cook for 1 min more, stirring to prevent it from burning. Stir in the thyme, turmeric and risotto rice for 1 min, coating the rice in the oil from the pan. Start adding the stock, a ladleful at a time, stirring well every 1-2 mins until the liquid is absorbed and the rice is cooked.","STEP 3","Mash half the squash and add to the pan along with the sausage meatballs and Parmesan. Stir, then top with the remaining squash, cover with a lid and leave for 2 mins. Serve with extra Parmesan."]
'3-veg mac ‘n’ cheese', ["150g butternut squash, cut into chunks","300g penne (we used Napolina 50% white 50% wholemeal)","40g butter","1 small leek, finely sliced (about 50g)","25g flour","600ml milk","100g frozen peas","175g mature Cheddar cheese (we used a vegetarian version)","1 slice day-old brown bread, blitzed into crumbs"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/fan 180C/gas 6. Put the butternut squash in a steamer over boiling water. Steam for around 15-20 mins or until tender. Drain and then blitz in a food processor until smooth.","STEP 2","Cook the pasta according to the pack instructions.","STEP 3","Heat the butter in a medium saucepan, add the leek and cook for 2 mins. Stir in the flour and cook for 1-2 mins more. Take the pan off the heat and gradually whisk in the milk. Return to the heat and bring to the boil, stirring all the time. Simmer for 5 mins. Stir in the peas and bring back to a simmer. Take the pan off the heat and stir in the butternut squash, then 125g cheese.","STEP 4","Stir the pasta into the sauce and transfer to an ovenproof dish. Sprinkle over the remaining cheese and the breadcrumbs. Bake for 20 mins or until golden and bubbling."]
'Lamb & quinoa burgers with beetroot tzatziki', ["50g quinoa","300g (3 or 4) cooked, vacuum-packed beetroot (not in vinegar), drained","250g natural yogurt","small bunch mint , chopped","500g lamb mince","small bunch dill , chopped","½ tbsp oil , for cooking (optional)","2 large carrots , peeled and grated","1 large or 2 small red onions , halved and finely sliced","pitta bread , wraps or burger buns to serve"], ["STEP 1","Cook the quinoa in plenty of boiling water for 10-15 mins (don’t worry if it still has a little bite), then drain well and leave to cool. Grate the beetroot and mix with the yogurt, half the mint and some seasoning. Chill until ready to serve.","STEP 2","Use your hands to squish together the cooked quinoa, the lamb, the remaining mint, half the dill and some seasoning. Shape into four burger\xa0patties. Heat a large frying pan (if it’s non-stick, you won’t need oil as the lamb mince is already fatty; otherwise, add a drizzle of oil). Cook the burgers for 5-8 mins on each side until they have a nice golden crust and are cooked through, then leave them to rest for a few mins.","STEP 3","Mix the carrots, onions and the remaining dill in a bowl. Gently warm the wraps or buns, then pile with the carrot\xa0mix, add\xa0the lamb patties and top with a dollop of the beetroot tzatziki."]
'Oven-baked ratatouille & sausages', ["1 onion , cut into 16 wedges","3 courgettes , cut into bite-sized pieces","1 red pepper , cut into bite-sized pieces","3 tbsp olive oil","8 large  pork sausages","2 garlic cloves , crushed","400g can  chopped tomato"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 220C/200C fan/gas 7. Place the onion, courgettes and red pepper in a baking dish, large enough to fit them in a single layer. Drizzle over 2 tbsp of the olive oil and season. Cook in the oven for 20 mins.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, heat the remaining olive oil in a frying pan and cook the sausages for about 5 mins until lightly browned on all sides.","STEP 3","Stir the garlic and chopped tomatoes into the veg, season again, then place the sausages on top and return to the oven to cook for a further 20 mins until the vegetables are tender."]
'Chorizo & mozzarella gnocchi bake', ["1 tbsp olive oil","1 onion , finely chopped","2 garlic cloves , crushed","120g chorizo , diced","2 x 400g cans chopped  tomatoes","1 tsp caster sugar","600g fresh gnocchi","125g mozzarella ball, cut into chunks","small bunch of basil , torn","green salad , to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a medium pan over a medium heat. Fry the onion and garlic for 8-10 mins until soft. Add the chorizo and fry for 5 mins more. Tip in the tomatoes and sugar, and season. Bring to a simmer, then add the gnocchi and cook for 8 mins, stirring often, until soft. Heat the grill to high.","STEP 2","Stir ¾ of the mozzarella and most of the basil through the gnocchi. Divide the mixture between six ovenproof ramekins, or put in one baking dish. Top with the remaining mozzarella, then grill for 3 mins, or until the cheese is melted and golden. Season, scatter over the remaining basil and serve with green salad."]
'Dude ranch tacos', ["a big ol\' 400g sirloin or rib-eye steak, or 2 smaller steaks","100ml good-quality barbecue sauce","50ml chilli sauce","pack of 8 flour tortillas","4 large ripe tomatoes , finely diced","juice 1 lime","2 spring onions , chopped","1 red chilli , chopped","1 ripe avocado , stoned and peeled","50ml soured cream","1 green chilli , chopped","juice 1 lime","small handful chopped mint leaves","small handful chopped coriander leaves","100ml mayonnaise","100ml soured cream","3 spring onions , chopped","1 green chilli , finely sliced","1 tsp ground cumin","1 tsp cider vinegar","1 tsp sugar","100g grated cheddar","shredded cabbage or crisp lettuce","juice 1 lime"], ["STEP 1","In a bowl, mix all the ingredients for the red sauce together with some seasoning, then do the same for the white sauce. To make the green sauce, mash the avocado, then mix with the rest of the ingredients and season. Dress the cabbage with a squeeze of lime and tip onto a plate.","STEP 2","Season the steak, and pan-fry or barbecue until cooked to your liking. Rest for 5 mins, then slice into strips and toss in the BBQ and chilli sauces.","STEP 3","Warm the wraps on a barbecue or in a dry frying pan for a few secs each side. Lay out everything and let everyone make their own taco."]
'Potato, pea & egg curry rotis', ["1 tbsp oil","2 tbsp mild curry paste","400g can chopped tomatoes","2 potatoes , cut into small chunks","200g peas","3 eggs , hard-boiled","pack rotis , warmed through","150g tub natural yogurt , to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a saucepan and briefly fry the curry paste. Tip in the tomatoes and half a can of water and bring to a simmer. Add the potatoes and cook for 20 mins, or until the potato is tender. Stir in the peas and cook for 3 mins.","STEP 2","Halve the eggs and place them on top of the curry, then warm everything through. Serve with the rotis and yogurt on the side."]
'Carbonara with chicken', ["1 pack spaghetti","1 tbsp olive oil","1 garlic clove, halved","77g pack pancetta","1 chicken breast, cut into strips","2 eggs","100g Grana Padano, finely grated, plus extra to serve (wrap the rest tightly and it will keep for several weeks)","1 tbsp butter"], ["STEP 1","Cook the spaghetti following pack instructions. Meanwhile, heat the oil in a frying pan and fry the garlic and pancetta until crisp, then add the chicken strips and fry briefly until they\'re just cooked through. Fish out the garlic clove and discard it. Beat the eggs with the grana padano and some black pepper.","STEP 2","Add a couple of tablespoons of pasta water to the pancetta pan along with the butter, then drain the pasta and add it to the pan. Pour in the egg mixture, take the pan off the heat and toss together so the egg cooks in the heat of the pasta. Divide between four warm bowls and top with more cheese, if you like."]
'Italian tuna balls', ["2 160g cans of  tuna  in sunflower or olive oil, drained (reserve a little oil)","small handful of  pine nuts","freshly grated zest 1 lemon","small handful parsley  leaves, roughly chopped","50g  fresh  breadcrumb","1 egg , beaten","400g spaghetti","500g jar pasta sauce"], ["STEP 1","Flake the tuna into a bowl, then tip in the pine nuts, lemon zest, parsley, breadcrumbs and egg. Season and mix together with your hands until completely combined. Roll the mix into 12 walnut-size balls. Put a large pan of salted water on to boil, then cook the spaghetti according to pack instructions.","STEP 2","Heat a little of the tuna oil in a large non-stick frying pan, then fry the tuna balls for 5 mins, turning every minute or so until completely golden. Drain on kitchen paper. Heat the tomato sauce, then toss together with the pasta and tuna balls."]
'Pesto chicken kebabs with roasted veg pasta', ["1 butternut squash , around 700g/1lb 9oz, halved, deseeded and cubed","2 courgettes , cubed","1 onion , chopped","2 red peppers , deseeded and cut into 2cm/1in pieces","4 thyme  sprigs, leaves removed","4 tbsp olive oil","4 boneless, skinless  chicken breasts , cut into 2cm/1in pieces","juice 1 and a ½ lemons","4 tbsp pesto","16 cherry tomatoes","600g penne  pasta"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/fan 180C/ gas 6. Put the vegetables into a large roasting tin. Scatter with the thyme and season. Drizzle with 2 tbsp olive oil and roast for 40 mins, turning halfway.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, soak 8 wooden skewers. Put the chicken into a shallow dish, then mix with the lemon juice and pesto.","STEP 3","Thread the chicken and tomatoes onto the skewers, then put onto a roasting tray. Drizzle with the rest of the olive oil and roast for 20 mins, turning once, until the chicken is cooked through. Boil the pasta. Toss half of the roasted vegetables and pasta together, then serve with the pesto chicken kebabs."]
'Curried chicken & new potato traybake', ["8 chicken drumsticks","3 tbsp olive oil","1 tsp garlic paste","1 tsp ginger paste","1 tsp garam masala","1 tsp turmeric","150ml pot  natural yogurt","500g new potatoes, halved","4 large tomatoes, roughly chopped","1 red onion, finely chopped","small pack coriander, roughly chopped"], ["STEP 1","Put the drumsticks in a large bowl with 1 tbsp oil, the garlic, ginger, garam masala, turmeric and 2 tbsp yogurt. Toss together with your hands until coated. Leave to marinate for at least 30 mins (can be left in the fridge overnight). Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4.","STEP 2","Put the potatoes in a large roasting tin with the remaining oil and plenty of seasoning. Add the chicken drumsticks and bake for 40-45 mins until cooked and golden.","STEP 3","Scatter the tomatoes, onion, coriander and some seasoning over the chicken and potatoes, with the remaining yogurt served on the side."]
'Bean & sausage hotpot', ["8 large sausages (course-cut ones like Toulouse or Cumberland are ideal)","¼ quantity tomato sauce (see \'Goes well with\')","3 x 400g/14oz cans butter beans","1 tbsp black treacle or muscovado sugar","1 tsp English mustard"], ["STEP 1","In a large casserole, fry the sausages until brown all over – about 10 mins.","STEP 2","Add the tomato sauce, stirring well, then stir in the beans, treacle or sugar and mustard. Bring to the simmer, cover and cook for 30 mins. Great served with crusty bread or rice."]
'Vegetarian fajitas', ["400g can black beans, drained","small bunch coriander, finely chopped","4 large or 8-12 small flour tortillas","1 avocado, sliced, or 1 small tub guacamole","2 tbsp soured cream","1 red and 1 yellow pepper, cut into strips","1 tbsp oil","1 red onion, cut into thin wedges","1 garlic clove, crushed","½ tsp chilli powder","½ tsp smoked paprika","½ tsp  ground cumin","1 lime, juiced"], ["STEP 1","To make the fajita mix, take two or three strips from each colour of pepper and finely chop them. Set aside. Heat the oil in a frying pan and fry the remaining pepper strips and the onion until soft and starting to brown at the edges. Cool slightly and mix in the chopped raw peppers. Add the garlic and cook for 1 min, then add the spices and stir. Cook for a couple of mins more until the spices become aromatic, then add half the lime juice and season. Transfer to a dish, leaving any juices behind, and keep warm.","STEP 2","Tip the black beans into the same pan, then add the remaining lime juice and plenty of seasoning. Stir the beans around the pan to warm them through and help them absorb any flavours of the fajita mix, then stir through the coriander.","STEP 3","Warm the tortillas in a microwave or in a low oven, then wrap them so they don’t dry out. Serve the tortillas with the fajita mix, beans, avocado and soured cream for everyone to help themselves."]
'Greek lamb meatballs', ["2 tbsp olive oil","500g lamb meatballs","300g baby new potatoes, thickly sliced","2 large garlic cloves, crushed","185g chargrilled vegetables, drained if in oil","2 x 400g cans chopped tomatoes with herbs","2 tsp light brown soft sugar","100g black olives","40g feta, crumbled","½ small bunch mint, finely shredded","1 lemon, zested"], ["STEP 1","Heat 1 tbsp of the oil in a large shallow flameproof casserole or frying pan over a medium heat. Add the meatballs and fry for 5 mins or until golden brown. Set aside on a plate.","STEP 2","Heat the remaining oil in the same pan and fry the potatoes over a medium heat for 5 mins, or until they’re starting to turn golden brown.","STEP 3","Add the garlic to the pan and fry for 1 min. Stir through the chargrilled veg, tomatoes and sugar, as well as the olives. Season. Add the meatballs back to the pan, cover and cook over a medium-low heat for 30-35 mins, stirring occasionally. Remove the lid halfway through, the potatoes should be just cooked through with the liquid slightly reduced.","STEP 4","Remove the pan from the heat and serve at the table with the feta, mint and lemon zest scattered over."]
'Baked sweet potatoes with steak fajita filling', ["4 sweet potatoes","2 tbsp olive oil , plus extra to rub on the potatoes","juice 1 lime","2 tsp chilli powder","1 tsp garlic powder","1 tsp ground cumin","500g lean beef steak , cut into medium-sized strips","2 onions , thinly sliced","a mixture of 4 orange, yellow and red peppers , thinly sliced","small handful coriander , chopped","2 avocados , halved, stoned and peeled"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 220C/200C fan/gas 7. Wash the sweet potatoes, prick them with a fork all over, then rub with a little olive oil and season generously. Wrap each potato in tin foil and bake on a baking tray for 45-55 mins until soft.","STEP 2","To make the marinade, put the lime juice, chilli powder, garlic powder, cumin, 1 tbsp olive oil and a generous pinch of seasoning in a bowl. Mix everything together, then pour half the marinade into a second bowl. Add the steak to one of the bowls and mix well. Add the onions and peppers to the other bowl and mix to ensure everything is evenly coated. Cover both bowls in cling film and chill in the fridge until needed.","STEP 3","When the sweet potatoes have about 20 mins left to cook, heat the remaining 1 tbsp olive oil in a large frying pan over a medium heat. Add the onion and pepper mixture, cook for 12-15 mins, stirring often, until they go soft and start to glisten and brown, then tip onto a plate. Wipe the pan clean with some kitchen paper, add the steak and cook for 3-5 mins, stirring often. Add the onions and peppers back to the pan for a few mins before serving, then remove from the heat and stir through most of the coriander.","STEP 4","Mash the avocado in a bowl with a fork. Add a good pinch of salt and the rest of the coriander.","STEP 5","To serve, halve each sweet potato lengthways, mash the insides with a fork, then top with a spoonful of the steak fajita mixture and a dollop of mashed avocado. Enjoy!"]
'Simple stir-fry', ["500g vegetables such as carrots, baby corn, broccoli, courgettes, red peppers and cabbage or pak choi","1 tbsp rapeseed oil","1 garlic clove, sliced","1cm fresh ginger, grated","1½ tbsp reduced salt soy sauce","2 tbsp sweet chilli sauce (optional)","200g cooked prawns, salmon (flaked) or chicken breast (shredded)","200g egg noodles, cooked"], ["STEP 1","Finely chop or slice the vegetables into pieces roughly the same size. Slice the carrots diagonally, slice the baby corn, cut the broccoli into small florets, then slice the stem, and finely slice the peppers, cabbage or pak choi. Heat the oil in a large frying pan or wok, then fry the garlic and ginger for 1 min.","STEP 2","Add the veg and toss to coat. Fry for 2-3 mins, then add the soy sauce and chilli sauce, if using, and mix well. Cook for 2-3 mins more until the veg is tender. Stir in the prawns, salmon or chicken and heat through. Serve over the noodles."]
'Quick pitta pizzas', ["4 wholewheat pitta breads","4 tsp sun-dried tomato purée","3 ripe plum tomatoes , diced","1 shallot , thinly sliced","85g chorizo , diced","50g mature cheddar , grated","few basil leaves , if you like"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6 and put a baking sheet inside to heat up. Spread each pitta with 1 tsp purée. Top with the tomatoes, shallot, chorizo and cheddar.","STEP 2","Place on the hot sheet and bake for 10 mins until the pittas are crisp, the cheese has melted and the chorizo has frazzled edges. Scatter with basil, if you like, and serve with a green salad."]
'Easy chicken Kiev', ["6 garlic cloves , 2 peeled","small bunch flat-leaf parsley","85g fresh breadcrumbs","4 skinless, boneless chicken breasts","4 tbsp garlic & herb soft cheese","PLUS 4 tsp olive oil"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Whizz together the 2 peeled garlic cloves, parsley and 1 tsp olive oil in a food processor. Add the breadcrumbs and seasoning before pulsing briefly to mix. Tip onto a plate.","STEP 2","Cut a slit (roughly thumb-length) in the side of each chicken breast, at the plump end. Spoon ¼ of the soft cheese into each hole and press the edges together to seal. Rub 2 tsp oil over all the chicken breasts before pressing the herby crumbs onto them.","STEP 3","Place the coated chicken in a shallow roasting tin. Scatter round the remaining unpeeled garlic cloves and drizzle with the rest of the oil. Bake for 20-25 mins until the chicken is cooked and crumbs crisp and golden. Squeeze out the soft, roasted garlic from the skins and serve with the chicken."]
'Indian koftas with mint yogurt & flatbreads', ["500g lamb mince","3 tbsp tikka curry paste","2 tbsp mango chutney","2 garlic cloves , finely grated","thumb-sized piece ginger , finely grated","225g Greek-style yogurt","1 ½ tbsp mint sauce","8 flatbreads","4 tomatoes , sliced","2 Little Gem lettuces , shredded"], ["STEP 1","In a large bowl, mix the lamb mince with the curry paste, mango chutney, garlic and ginger. Season a little and roll into 20 oval balls. Heat a large, non-stick frying pan – you shouldn’t need any oil, as lamb mince is quite fatty. Cook the koftas in batches for 2-3 mins – be careful as they are quite fragile.","STEP 2","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/ gas 6. Transfer the koftas to a baking tray and put in the oven for 10 mins, adding the flatbreads for the final 5 mins. Mix the yogurt with the mint sauce. Serve the koftas wrapped in a flatbread with some minty yogurt, tomato and lettuce."]
'Sausage & white bean casserole', ["1 red or yellow pepper, deseeded and cut into chunks","2 carrots, cut into thick slices","2 red onions, cut into wedges","8 chipolatas, cut into thirds","400g can peeled cherry tomatoes","400g can white beans, drained","200ml low-salt chicken stock","2 tsp Dijon mustard","100g frozen peas","potatoes, pasta or rice, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 220C/200C fan/gas 7. Roast the pepper, carrots and onion in a deep baking dish for 15 mins. Add the sausages and roast for a further 10 mins.","STEP 2","Reduce oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6, tip in the tomatoes and beans, then stir in the stock. Cook for another 35 mins. Stir in the mustard and peas and return to the oven for 5 mins. Rest for 10 mins, then serve with potatoes, pasta or rice."]
'Pot-roast Bombay chicken', ["1 small whole chicken","5 tbsp tikka masala paste","1 tbsp sunflower oil","1 large red onion, halved and sliced","2 large tomatoes, halved and chopped","1 tbsp fenugreek seeds","1 thumb-sized piece ginger, grated","2 x 400g cans full-fat coconut milk","500g new potatoes, halved","100g baby spinach","25g pack coriander, torn, to serve","poppadums and chutney, to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 220C/200C fan/gas 6. Put the chicken on a chopping board and, using your hands, rub the skin generously with half the spice paste. Season well, tie the legs together and set aside.","STEP 2","Heat the oil in a large flameproof casserole dish over a medium heat. Add the onion and a good pinch of salt and cook for 5 mins or until beginning to soften. Add the tomatoes, fenugreek seeds, ginger and remaining spice paste, and cook for 3 mins more. Stir through the coconut milk and bring to a simmer. Add the chicken and the potatoes to the dish, and cook in the oven for 20 mins, uncovered.","STEP 3","Lower the heat to 180C/160C fan/ gas 4 and cook for 55 mins more. Check that the meat is cooked by cutting through one of its legs – the flesh shouldn’t be pink.","STEP 4","Remove the chicken and place on a chopping board. Stir the spinach through the sauce and leave to rest for 5 mins. Put the chicken back in the dish, top with the coriander and carve at the table. Serve with poppadums and chutney, if you like."]
'Gnocchi & tomato bake', ["1 tbsp olive oil","1 onion, chopped","1 red pepper, deseeded and finely chopped","1 garlic clove, crushed","400g can  chopped tomatoes","500g pack gnocchi","handful  basil leaves, torn","half a ball mozzarella, torn into chunks"], ["STEP 1","Heat grill to high. Heat 1 tbsp olive oil in a large frying pan, then soften 1 chopped onion and 1 finely chopped red pepper for 5 mins.","STEP 2","Stir in 1 crushed garlic clove, fry for 1 min, tip in 400g chopped tomatoes and 500g gnocchi, then bring to a simmer.","STEP 3","Bubble for 10-15 mins, stirring occasionally, until the gnocchi is soft and the sauce has thickened.","STEP 4","Season, stir through a handful of torn basil leaves, then transfer to a large ovenproof dish.","STEP 5","Scatter with torn chunks of half a 125g mozzarella ball, then grill for 5-6 mins until the cheese is bubbling and golden."]
'Honey & soy chicken with sesame broccoli', ["3 tbsp soy sauce","3 tbsp honey","2 tbsp oil","1 tbsp garlic & ginger paste","8 skin-on chicken thighs","1 large head broccoli , cut into florets","1 tbsp sesame seeds","rice , to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Mix the soy, honey, 1 tbsp of the oil and ½ tbsp garlic & ginger paste in a bowl. Pour over the chicken thighs and leave to marinate if you have time, but don’t worry if not – they will be delicious either way. Tip the chicken with all the marinade into a roasting tin, skin-side up. Cook for 45 mins until sticky and the skin is crispy.","STEP 2","When the chicken has 15 mins left, start cooking the rice following pack instructions, if using, and heat the remaining oil in a frying pan. Add the remaining garlic & ginger paste, sizzle for 1 min, then tip in the broccoli along with a splash of water. Cover and cook for 10 mins until tender, then take the lid off, tip the sesame seeds into the pan and give everything a good toss around. Season. Serve with the chicken, and all the caramelised bits from the bottom of the tin."]
'Family meals: Easy lamb tagine', ["2 tbsp olive oil","1 onion, finely diced","2 carrots, finely diced (about 150g)","500g diced leg of lamb","2 fat cloves garlic, crushed","½ tsp cumin","½ tsp ground ginger","¼ tsp saffron strands","1 tsp ground cinnamon","1 tbsp clear honey","100g soft dried apricot, quartered","1 low-salt vegetable stock cube","1 small butternut squash, peeled, seeds removed and cut into 1cm dice","steamed couscous or rice, to serve","chopped parsley and toasted pine nuts, to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat the olive oil in a heavy-based pan and add the onion and carrot. Cook for 3- 4 mins until softened.","STEP 2","Add the diced lamb and brown all over. Stir in the garlic and all the spices and cook for a few mins more or until the aromas are released.","STEP 3","Add the honey and apricots, crumble in the stock cube and pour over roughly 500ml boiling water or enough to cover the meat. Give it a good stir and bring to the boil. Turn down to a simmer, put the lid on and cook for 1 hour.","STEP 4","Remove the lid and cook for a further 30 mins, then stir in the squash. Cook for 20 – 30 mins more until the squash is soft and the lamb is tender. Serve alongside rice or couscous and sprinkle with parsley and pine nuts, if using."]
'Easy chicken & bean enchiladas', ["1 tbsp vegetable oil","1 red onion , chopped","1 garlic clove , crushed","1 tbsp fajita seasoning","2 x 395g cans kidney beans in chilli sauce","2 roast chicken legs , meat shredded off the bone","195g can sweetcorn , drained","8 flour tortillas","140g hard cheese , grated"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Heat the oil in a frying pan and cook the onion and garlic for 5 mins. Stir in the fajita seasoning and cook for 1 min more before adding the kidney beans, shredded chicken and sweetcorn.","STEP 2","Divide the mixture between the tortillas, sprinkle over half the cheese, then roll up and place into a baking dish. Sprinkle over the remaining cheese, then bake for 20-25 mins until golden and bubbling."]
'Pork cassoulet', ["4 tbsp fat (lard if you’re budgeting, goose or duck fat if you\'re not)","350g assorted pork , diced (a mixture of bacon, sausage and diced pork works well)","1 large onion , halved and sliced","10 fat garlic cloves , peeled","1 carrot , thinly sliced","1 tsp fennel seeds","2 tbsp red wine vinegar","600ml stock","1 tbsp tomato purée","2 rosemary stalks, leaves picked and chopped","handful of parsley , finely chopped","400g can haricot or cannellini beans , drained","few tbsp fresh or dried breadcrumbs","drizzle of oil , whatever you have","crusty bread , to serve","green vegetables , to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 140C/120C fan/gas 1. Put a large ovenproof pan (with a tight-fitting lid) on a high heat. Add your fat and diced meat, cook for a few mins to seal the edges, giving it a quick stir to cook evenly. Reduce the heat to low, add the sliced onion, whole garlic cloves, carrot and fennel seeds, and cook gently to soften the veg for a few mins.","STEP 2","Pour over the red wine vinegar, scraping any meaty bits off the bottom of the pan. Add the stock, tomato purée, and half the rosemary and parsley. Bring to the boil and simmer for 10 mins, then season, cover with a lid and put into the oven for 2 hrs, removing the lid for the final hour of cooking. Stir occasionally and add the beans with 30 mins to go.","STEP 3","Remove the pan from the oven and heat the grill. Scatter the top with the remaining herbs and breadcrumbs, drizzle a little oil over the top, and return to the oven for 5-10 mins, until the breadcrumbs are golden. Serve with crusty bread and green veg."]
'Crispy chicken strips', ["150ml buttermilk , or skimmed milk mixed with 2 tsp lemon juice then left for 5 mins","2 large skinless chicken breasts or 4 small pieces pork escalope","50g panko breadcrumbs","1 tbsp rapeseed oil","2 tbsp ketchup","1 tsp soy sauce","½ tsp white wine vinegar","2 large or 4 small  carrots  (about 300g), peeled and grated","½ lemon , juiced","1 tbsp olive oil","baked potatoes , to serve"], ["STEP 1","Pour the buttermilk into a wide, shallow bowl. Cut each chicken breast in half horizontally and pat dry with kitchen paper. Turn them over in the buttermilk, leave in the dish and chill for 1 hr. Meanwhile, for the salad, mix the carrot with the lemon juice and olive oil. Mix the sauce ingredients together in another bowl and set both aside.","STEP 2","Heat a large, non-stick frying pan, tip in the breadcrumbs and toast in the dry pan for 2-3 mins until pale brown, stirring regularly so they don’t burn. Tip into a bowl and break up any large clumps.","STEP 3","Heat oven to 230C/210C fan/gas 8. Tip the crumbs onto a large plate, then lift the chicken breasts from the buttermilk, and roll them in the crumbs, making sure they are coated evenly.","STEP 4","Heat ½ tbsp of oil in a non-stick frying pan. Fry the chicken for 1-2 mins over a medium-high heat, then turn it over, adding the rest of the oil and fry for 1 min more.","STEP 5","Transfer the chicken to a baking sheet and bake for 5 mins, then rest for 5 mins and cut into strips. Serve the chicken and the carrot salad with the sauce and baked potatoes."]
'BBQ chicken burgers', ["4 skinless, boneless chicken breasts","4 rashers bacon (optional)","4 large burger buns , sliced in half","lettuce , tomato and red onion, to serve","4 tbsp tomato ketchup","4 tbsp brown sauce","splash chilli sauce (optional)","2 tsp clear honey","2 garlic cloves , crushed"], ["STEP 1","Make the sauce and marinade by mixing everything together in a large bowl, then put a few spoonfuls aside. Slice halfway into the thickest part of each breast and open it up like a book. Flatten down slightly with your hand, then toss in the bowlful of marinade to coat. Chill for as little, or as long, as you have time to.","STEP 2","Barbecue the chicken for about 10 mins until completely cooked through, turning so it doesn’t burn but is nicely charred and sticky. Cook the bacon at the same time until crisp, if using, and toast the buns. Assemble the burgers with lettuce, slices of tomato, onion and the reserved sauce on the side for dolloping on top."]
'Pepper, pesto & sweetcorn calzones', ["500g pack bread mix","100g passata","290g jar roasted red peppers , drained and roughly chopped","100g frozen sweetcorn","125g ball mozzarella , torn into pieces","50g parmesan (or vegetarian alternative), grated","handful basil leaves , torn","50g pesto","1 egg , beaten","dressed salad leaves , to serve"], ["STEP 1","Make up the bread mix to pack instructions, reserving a little of the flour for dusting, and leave to prove for 30 mins.","STEP 2","Line a baking tray with baking parchment. Tip the dough onto a floured surface and cut into quarters. Roll each ball of dough to a circle, roughly 20cm wide. Spread a little passata over each base, leaving a border of about 1cm around the edge. Season well.","STEP 3","Top with the peppers, sweetcorn, mozzarella, Parmesan, basil and blobs of pesto. Fold each base in half, to make a half-moon shape, then squeeze the edges together, rolling them a little to stick and create a seal. Cover the tray with cling film and leave for 10 mins. Heat oven to 220C/200C fan/gas 7.","STEP 4","Brush the calzones all over with beaten egg, then bake for 25-30 mins or until puffed and golden brown. Serve with dressed salad leaves."]
'Artichoke, aubergine & lamb moussaka', ["olive oil , for frying","1kg lamb mince","2 large onions , finely chopped","3 garlic cloves , chopped","2 x 395g cans cherry tomatoes  in thick juice","2 bay leaves","1 cinnamon stick","½ tsp dried oregano","pinch of sugar","2 medium aubergines","700g large potatoes","2 x 390g cans artichoke hearts, drained really well (see tip)","100g butter","100g plain flour","900ml milk","very generous grating of nutmeg","125g grated gruyère","25g grated parmesan","3 medium eggs, lightly beaten"], ["STEP 1","Heat 1 1/2 tbsp olive oil in a broad, heavy-bottomed pan until hot, then fry the lamb until golden brown all over, about 10 mins (it’s important that the oil is hot, otherwise you’ll end up steaming the lamb instead of frying it). Remove with a slotted spoon and set aside in a large bowl. Pour off all but 2 tbsp oil in the pan (the lamb will release quite a bit). Heat this and fry the onions over a medium heat until soft and golden. Add the garlic and cook for another few mins, then add the tomatoes, bay, cinnamon, oregano, sugar and seasoning. Bring to the boil, then turn down to a simmer. Return the meat to the pan, cover and cook for 40 mins over a low heat. Take off the lid and cook until you have a thick sauce (it shouldn’t be too ‘soupy’).","STEP 2","While the meat is cooking, cut the aubergines into rounds. Cut the potatoes into thin slices. Heat 2 tbsp olive oil in a frying pan and cook the aubergine in batches until golden on both sides (get two pans on the go if you have them), then turn down the heat and cook until soft. Season and remove from the pan. Add a little more oil and cook the potatoes in batches, on both sides, until pale gold, removing them as you go. You’ll need to add more oil to the pan when you fry each batch. Season and set aside.","STEP 3","Fry the artichoke hearts in olive oil over a high heat to get some colour, but be careful that they don’t fall apart. Season.","STEP 4","Remove the bay leaves and cinnamon stick from the meat and taste for seasoning. Layer up the moussaka in a dish measuring roughly 32 x 23 x 6cm. Start by putting all the potatoes in the bottom, then add half the meat. Arrange a layer of aubergine on top of this, then the rest of the meat. Spoon the artichoke hearts on top.","STEP 5","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/ gas 6. To make the sauce, melt the butter in a heavy-bottomed pan and stir in the flour until it becomes slightly dry and sandy in colour. Take off the heat and start to add the milk, a little at a time. Beat well after each addition and keep the mixture smooth. Keep adding until you have used up all the milk. Put the pan back on a medium heat and bring to the boil, stirring continuously, until it thickens to form a sauce. Add lots of nutmeg, salt and pepper. Turn down the heat and cook gently for about 5 mins – this just helps to cook the flour in the sauce. Add three-quarters of the cheese and stir to help it to melt. Check the seasoning – it needs assertive seasoning. Leave to cool a little, then beat in the eggs.","STEP 6","Pour this over the layers in the dish and scatter the remaining cheese on top. Bake in the oven for 30 mins until the top is brown and bubbling. Leave to cool for about 10 mins – Greeks never eat it piping hot – then serve."]
'Pulled pork tacos with pineapple salsa', ["1½kg boneless  pork shoulder, rind removed and cut into 6 chunks","2 garlic cloves , crushed","2 tbsp tomato purée","1 tbsp chipotle paste","1 orange , juiced","2 limes , juiced","432g can  pineapple , juice only (save the chunks for the salsa, below)","2 tsp dried  oregano","2 tsp smoked  paprika","1 tsp ground cumin","1 tsp ground coriander","grating of fresh  nutmeg","432g can  pineapple , drained","½ red onion , finely chopped","handful of  coriander , chopped","1 lime , juiced","1 red chilli , chopped (optional)","8-10 taco shells or wraps","½ red cabbage , finely shredded","1 avocado , sliced","100ml soured cream (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Put the pork in a large, lidded ovenproof dish with the remaining ingredients and mix well to coat. If you can, chill and marinate overnight.","STEP 2","Heat the oven to 140C/120C fan/gas 1. Put the lid on the dish and cook on the middle shelf for 4 hrs. Check after 2 hrs and spoon over the juices. Check the meat is tender by pulling it apart with two forks. If it resists, cook for 1-2 hrs more.","STEP 3","Mix the ingredients for the salsa in a bowl and warm the tacos. Shred the pork and remove any fat or sinew. Serve with the cabbage, avocado, soured cream and salsa."]
'Pizza with homemade sauce', ["300g strong white bread flour , plus extra for dusting","1 tsp instant yeast","1 tbsp olive oil","1 tbsp olive oil , plus a drizzle","2 garlic cloves , crushed","200ml passata","8 mozzarella pearls , halved","small bunch fresh basil"], ["STEP 1","Tip the flour into a bowl, then stir in the yeast and 1 tsp salt. Make a well in the centre and pour in 200ml warm water (make sure it’s not too hot) along with the oil. Stir together with a wooden spoon until you have a soft, fairly wet dough.","STEP 2","Tip the dough out onto a lightly floured surface and knead for 5 mins until smooth. Cover with a tea towel and set aside for an hour or so or until the dough has puffed up and doubled in size. You can also leave the rough, unkneaded dough in the bowl, cover with a tea towel and leave in the fridge overnight and the dough will continue to prove on its own.","STEP 3","Meanwhile, make the tomato sauce. Put the oil in a small pan and fry the garlic briefly (don’t let it brown), then add the passata and simmer everything until the sauce thickens a little. Leave to cool.","STEP 4","Once the dough has risen, knead it quickly in the bowl to knock it back, then tip out onto a lightly floured surface and cut into two balls. Roll out each ball into a large teardrop that is very thin and about 25cm across (teardrop shapes fit baking sheets more easily than rounds).","STEP 5","Heat oven to 240C/220C fan/ gas 9 with a large baking sheet inside. Lift one of the bases onto another floured baking sheet. Smooth the sauce over the base with the back of a spoon, scatter over half the mozzarella, drizzle with olive oil and season. Put the pizza, still on its baking sheet, on top of the hot sheet in the oven and bake for 8-10 mins until crisp."]
'Pork & apple burgers', ["300g sausagemeat","4 wholemeal burger buns","4 tsp onion marmalade","2 apples , cored and thinly sliced","2 handfuls rocket","2 tsp mayonnaise","a little English English mustard (optional)","sweet potato wedges , to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Divide the sausagemeat into four portions and shape into patties. Fry in a non-stick pan for 10-12 mins, flipping a couple of times, until golden on both sides and cooked all the way through.","STEP 2","Heat grill to high. Slice the buns in half and toast under the grill, cut-side up.","STEP 3","Spread the bottom halves of the toasted buns with the marmalade, then add the burgers, apple slices, rocket, mayonnaise and mustard (if using). Top with the bun lids and serve alongside sweet potato wedges, if you like."]
'Spring roast chicken', ["8 chicken thighs , on the bone, skin on","2 tbsp olive oil","1 lemon , zested and cut into wedges","4 shallots , thickly sliced","4 rosemary sprigs","small pack tarragon","450g asparagus spears, trimmed","2 courgettes , thickly sliced on the diagonal","250g peas (preferably fresh, not frozen)","100g feta , crumbled"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Put the chicken thighs in a large shallow roasting tin, season and toss with the olive oil, lemon zest and wedges, shallots, rosemary and tarragon. Arrange the chicken thighs, skin-side up, and roast for 40-50 mins until the skin is crisp and golden.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, bring a large pan of water to the boil and cook the asparagus for 3 mins or until tender, adding the courgettes and peas for the final minute.","STEP 3","Drain the vegetables and toss in with the chicken, coating well with the cooking juices. Crumble over the feta and serve."]
'Prawn tikka masala', ["1 large onion , roughly chopped","1 thumb-sized piece ginger , peeled and grated","2 large garlic cloves","1 tbsp rapeseed oil","2-3 tbsp tikka curry paste","400g can chopped tomatoes","2 tbsp tomato purée","½ tbsp light brown soft sugar","3 cardamom pods , bashed","200g brown basmati rice","3 tbsp ground almonds","300g raw king prawns","1 tbsp double cream","½ bunch of coriander , roughly chopped","naan breads , warmed, to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Put the onion, ginger and garlic in a food processor and blitz to a smooth paste. Heat the oil in a large flameproof casserole dish or pan over a medium heat. Add the onion paste and fry for 8 mins or until lightly golden. Stir in the curry paste and fry for 1 min more. Add the tomatoes, tomato purée, sugar and cardamom pods. Bring to a simmer and cook, covered, for another 10 mins.","STEP 2","Cook the rice following pack instructions.","STEP 3","Scoop the cardamom out of the curry sauce and discard, then blitz with a hand blender, or in a clean food processor. Return to the pan, add the almonds and prawns, and cook for 5 mins. Season to taste and stir through the cream and coriander. Serve with the rice and naan breads, if you like."]
'Chicken, sweet potato & pea curry', ["1 tbsp rapeseed oil","1 tbsp korma paste","2 skinless chicken breast fillets, each cut into 8-10 pieces","320g sweet potatoes , chopped into bite-sized pieces","6 tbsp red lentils","325ml can light coconut milk (freeze the rest for later)","200g frozen peas","220g cherry tomatoes","300g cooked rice or roti, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a deep frying pan or wok, stir in the curry paste and fry for 30 seconds until it becomes fragrant. Stir in the chicken, then add the sweet potatoes and lentils and keep stirring to coat everything in the paste. Add 300ml water and the coconut milk. Bring to the boil, then simmer for 15-20 mins or until the chicken and sweet potato are cooked through and the consistency of the sauce is slightly thickened.","STEP 2","Tip in the peas, bring back to the boil and simmer for a further 2 mins, then add the tomatoes and cook for 2 mins more. Serve with steamed rice, or roti."]
'Nutty chicken curry', ["1 large red chilli , deseeded","½ a finger-length piece fresh root ginger , roughly chopped","1 fat garlic clove","small bunch coriander , stalks roughly chopped","1 tbsp sunflower oil","4 skinless chicken breasts , cut into chunks","5 tbsp peanut butter","150ml chicken stock","200g tub Greek yogurt"], ["STEP 1","Finely slice a quarter of the chilli, then put the rest in a food processor with the ginger, garlic, coriander stalks and one-third of the leaves. Whizz to a rough paste with a splash of water if needed.","STEP 2","Heat the oil in a frying pan, then quickly brown the chicken chunks for 1 min. Stir in the paste for another min, then add the peanut butter, stock and yogurt. When the sauce is gently bubbling, cook for 10 mins until the chicken is just cooked through and sauce thickened. Stir in most of the remaining coriander, then scatter the rest on top with the chilli, if using. Eat with rice or mashed sweet potato."]
'Chocolate gingerbread brownie bars with fudgy icing', ["400g dark chocolate , broken into chunks","25g cocoa powder","250g golden caster sugar","250g butter","1 tbsp ground ginger","140g ground almond","6 large eggs , separated","100g butter , cubed","50g dark chocolate , use a bar broken into pieces, or chips","50g cocoa","200g icing sugar , sifted","2 tbsp ground ginger","few chunks crystallised ginger , chopped into small pieces"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Grease a 20 x 30cm cake tin, and line the base and sides with baking parchment. Melt the chocolate, cocoa, sugar and butter together in a saucepan over a very low heat. Once the chocolate and butter have melted and sugar dissolved, remove from the heat and stir in the ginger and almonds, followed by the egg yolks, one at a time.","STEP 2","Beat the egg whites to stiff peaks. Using a metal spoon, stir a couple of spoonfuls of the egg whites into the chocolate mixture to loosen before very gently folding in the rest.","STEP 3","Gently scrape into the tin. Bake for 30-35 mins until the top looks set and the centre doesn’t wobble too much. Sit the cake tin on a wire rack and leave to cool completely.","STEP 4","Once cool, make the icing. Put the butter, chocolate, cocoa, icing sugar, ground ginger and 4 tbsp water in a pan. Gently heat, stirring, until you have a smooth icing. Pour over the cake (still in its tin), leave for 1-2 mins to cool slightly, then scatter over the ginger. Cool completely (you can also store in the fridge if you bring out to room temperature about 20 mins before serving) before cutting into bars."]
'One-pot paneer curry pie', ["2 tbsp vegetable oil","440g paneer , cut into 2cm cubes","4 tbsp ghee or butter","2 large onions , finely sliced","2 large garlic cloves , crushed","thumb-sized piece of ginger , finely grated","½ tsp hot chilli powder","2 tsp ground cumin","2 tsp fenugreek seeds","1½ tbsp garam masala","2 x 400g cans chopped tomatoes","1 tbsp caster sugar","300g potato , peeled and cut into 2cm cubes","150g spinach","150g frozen peas","100ml double cream","2 tbsp cashew nut butter","plain flour , for dusting","320g sheet  all-butter puff pastry","2 large eggs , 1 whole, 1 yolk only, lightly beaten together (freeze the leftover egg white for another recipe)","2 tsp nigella seeds","pilau rice or green veg, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil over a medium heat in a shallow flameproof casserole dish roughly 30cm wide. Add the paneer and fry for 5 mins, turning with tongs until each side is golden. Remove from the pan and set aside on a plate lined with kitchen paper.","STEP 2","Heat the ghee or butter in the same dish over a medium-low heat, then add the onions and a big pinch of salt. Fry for 15 mins, or until softened and caramelised. Stir in the garlic and ginger, cook for 1 min, then tip in the spices and fry for a further 2 mins. Scrape the spiced onions into a food processor or blender along with the tomatoes and blitz until smooth. Pour back into the pan with 1½ cans of water, then stir through the sugar and potatoes. Bring to the boil, lower to a simmer, then cover and cook, stirring occasionally, for 20-25 mins or until the potato is just tender.","STEP 3","Add the spinach and peas, and cook for 5 mins. Stir in the cream and cashew butter, then return the paneer to the pan and season to taste. Remove from the heat and set aside to cool completely.","STEP 4","Heat the oven to 220C/200C fan/gas 8. On a lightly floured surface, roll the pastry out to just bigger than your casserole dish. Cut a thin strip off each side and fix these around the edge of the casserole. Roll the pastry sheet over the top and press the edges with a fork to seal, and tuck in any overhang. Brush with the egg, sprinkle with the nigella seeds and bake for 30-35 mins or until deep golden brown. Leave to rest for 15 mins before serving with pilau rice or green veg."]
'Sausage casserole with garlic toasts', ["8 reduced-fat sausages","1 yellow pepper , deseeded and chopped","4 red onions , cut into wedges","400g can chopped tomatoes","250ml vegetable stock","1 tbsp  x 20g pack basil  (use the rest in the toasts)"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 220C/fan 200C/gas 7. Put the sausages, pepper and onion into a roasting tin, then roast for 20 mins.","STEP 2","Lower oven to 200C/fan 180C/gas 6, then tip tomatoes and stock over the sausages. Add sugar and most of the basil, season, then stir well. Roast for another 20 mins. Serve with garlic toasts, recipe below, sprinkled with the remaining basil."]
'Bombay potato omelette', ["1 tbsp vegetable oil","½ onion , sliced","1 medium cooked potato (leftover boiled or roasted potatoes are fine), cubed","1 tsp medium curry powder","1 tsp nigella seeds","2 large eggs , whisked","1 tbsp natural yogurt or raita","good squeeze chilli sauce (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat most of the oil in a pan. Fry the onion for 10 mins until starting to caramelise, then add the potato and fry for a further 8 mins until the edges are beginning to crisp. Add the curry powder, most of the nigella seeds, some seasoning and a splash of water. Cook for 1-2 mins, then scoop the mixture onto a plate. Wipe out the pan with kitchen paper.","STEP 2","Increase the heat and add the remaining oil to the pan. Add the eggs and some seasoning, then use a spatula to stir a few times. Leave to cook for 30 seconds. Pile the potato filling onto one side of the omelette while the top is still a little soft. Fold the omelette over to cover the filling and cook for a final 1-2 mins, if you like your omelette set all the way through. To serve, top with a drizzle\xa0of yogurt or raita and some chilli sauce, if you like."]
'Cheesy cauliflower & bacon gratin', ["1 tsp vegetable oil","200g smoked  bacon lardons or cubetti di pancetta","2 large onions , sliced","800g potatoes , thickly sliced","1kg cauliflower , cut into bite-size florets","100g medium-mature cheddar or gruyère , coarsely grated","250ml double cream"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Heat the oil in a pan and fry the bacon for 5 mins until just starting to crisp. Add the onion and sizzle for 12 mins until soft and golden.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, tip the potatoes into a large pan of water, making sure they are well covered. Bring to a gentle boil, then add the cauliflower and cook everything for 6-7 mins until both are tender. Tip into a colander and drain thoroughly.","STEP 3","In a gratin dish, layer the potato and cauliflower, then scatter with bacon, onion and a small handful of cheese. Drizzle each layer with a little cream and season. Continue until all the layers are finished, pour over the remaining cream and scatter with the last of the cheese. Bake for 30 mins until bubbling. Remove from the oven and set aside for 1 min to rest. Serve straight from the dish with a crisp green salad."]
'Macaroni cheese lasagne', ["2 tbsp olive oil","400g lean beef mince","50g smoked pancetta, chopped","½ onion, finely chopped","½ celery stick, finely chopped","½ carrot, finely chopped","1 garlic clove, crushed","150ml red wine","1 tbsp tomato purée","400g can chopped tomatoes","250ml beef stock","2 bay leaves","1 rosemary sprig","1 tsp sugar","400g macaroni","80g grated mozzarella","a few whole basil leaves, to serve (optional)","50g butter","50g plain flour","2 tsp English mustard","800ml semi-skimmed milk","small grating of nutmeg","100g grated parmesan","100g mature cheddar, grated"], ["STEP 1","Heat half the oil in a large, heavy-based frying pan or casserole dish over a medium-high heat, and fry the mince and pancetta until golden. Transfer to a bowl using a slotted spoon and set aside.","STEP 2","Add the remaining oil to the pan and fry the onion, celery and carrot for 10 mins until just softened. Add the garlic and cook for 1 min more, then return the meat to the pan.Tip in the wine, bring to a simmer and cook until the mixture is reduced by half. Stir in the tomato purée, tomatoes, stock, bay, rosemary and sugar. Simmer, covered, for 30 mins, then remove the lid and simmer uncovered for another 10 mins until reduced. The ragu will keep in the freezer for up to two months. Leave to cool completely before freezing.","STEP 3","Meanwhile, make the cheese sauce. Melt the butter in a saucepan until foaming, then stir in the flour and cook for 2 mins. Stir in the mustard, then remove from the heat and gradually whisk in the milk in small additions. Return the pan to the heat and simmer for 5-6 mins, whisking continuously until thick and smooth. Add the nutmeg, parmesan and 80g of the cheddar, then season to taste.","STEP 4","Heat the oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6, and cook the macaroni in a large pan of boiling water for 5 mins. Drain, then stir into the cheese sauce. Spread the ragu into the base of a large rectangular baking dish (ours was 28 x 22 x 5cm), then spoon over the mac ‘n’ cheese and gently spread out using the back of a spoon to cover the ragu. Top with the remaining cheddar and the mozzarella, and bake for 25-30 mins until golden and bubbling. Leave to rest for 5 mins, then scatter over a few basil leaves to serve, if you like."]
'Hunter’s chicken', ["1 tbsp vegetable oil, plus extra for the tray","2 skinless chicken breasts","4 rashers smoked back bacon","1 red onion, sliced","½ pack runner beans, ends trimmed","2 carrots, peeled and sliced","50ml sticky BBQ sauce","25g grated parmesan","4 potatoes, peeled and chopped","100ml milk","2 tbsp cream cheese"], ["STEP 1","Heat\xa0oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Oil a tray, put the\xa0chicken breasts on it and cover each one with\xa02 bacon\xa0rashers. Put the\xa0chicken in the oven for 20-25 mins until cooked through.","STEP 2","While the chicken is cooking,\xa0fry the\xa0onion in\xa01\xa0tbsp oil until golden brown and soft, then set\xa0aside. Put the potatoes in a large pan\xa0of boiling water and cook for 10-15 mins until soft. Put another smaller pan of water on the hob and bring to the boil\xa0while the potatoes are cooking. Once boiling, tip in\xa0the runner beans and carrots and cook\xa0for 8-10 mins until soft but with a little bite. Drain the potatoes and put them back in\xa0the pan\xa0with the milk and cream cheese, mash until smooth and stir though the fried onions.","STEP 3","Once the chicken is cooked, pour over the BBQ sauce and scatter over the\xa0parmesan and return to the oven for 2 mins until the cheese has melted. Serve\xa0with the mash, carrots and runner beans."]
'Beer mac ‘n’ cheese', ["50g butter","2 garlic cloves, grated","50g spinach","500ml milk","250ml pale ale","220g macaroni","100g cheddar, grated","200g mozzarella, grated"], ["STEP 1","Heat the grill to its highest setting. In a flameproof casserole dish or metal frying pan, melt the butter and fry the garlic for 2 mins. Add the spinach and cook until it wilts, about 2 mins. Pour in the milk and beer and bring to a gentle bubble. Add the macaroni and stir intermittently for around 20 mins until the pasta is cooked and covered in sauce.","STEP 2","Stir in the cheddar and half the mozzarella. When it starts to melt, sprinkle the remaining mozzarella on top and put it in the oven for around 7-10 mins or until browned on top and sensational underneath."]
'Steak & chips pie', ["2 tbsp sunflower oil , plus extra for the dish","750g-1kg braising steak  (or topside) sliced into 6 thin steaks (buy a joint and do it yourself if you can’t find any already sliced)","2 onions , chopped","4 medium carrots , chopped","1 tsp treacle , sugar or golden caster sugar","1 tbsp plain flour","175ml red wine","2 beef stock cubes diluted in 600ml hot water","small bunch thyme , half of the leaves picked for the pastry and reserved","3 bay leaves , tied together","500g block of shortcrust pastry","flour ,  for dusting","1 tsp dried porcini mushroom powder (optional)","thyme leaves , from the bunch used for the beef","800g frozen oven chips"], ["STEP 1","Up to three days before, braise the steak. Heat oven to 160C/140C fan/gas 3. Heat half the oil in a flameproof casserole pan and brown the steaks really well on either side, then set aside. Add the onions and carrots to the pan, drizzle over a little more oil, then cook over a low heat for 5 mins until coloured. Drizzle over the treacle or add the sugar, and scatter in the flour, stirring until you have a brown paste clinging to the vegetables. Tip the meat and any juices back into the pan and give it all a good stir. Pour over the wine and stock, season, tuck in the herbs and bring everything to a simmer. Cover with a lid and cook in the oven for about two hours, or until the meat is tender, then leave to cool and chill until needed. Can be prepared up to two days ahead and chilled.","STEP 2","To make the pastry, roll out the block on a floured surface to the thickness of a £1 coin and\xa0scatter over the thyme leaves and mushroom powder. Fold the pastry into quarters and chill until needed. Or, to give the pastry a more interesting finish, scatter over the thyme and mushroom powder when you roll the pastry out to line the dish, rolling over them firmly so they stick. Can be prepared a day ahead and chilled.","STEP 3","Heat oven to 220C/200C fan/gas 7 and put a baking sheet in the oven. Oil a 24-28cm pie dish or tin (ideally with a lip) and dust well with flour. Roll out the pastry to a thick-ish round that will easily line the pie dish with a slight overhang, then line the dish. Lift the steak out of the gravy, then spoon in the vegetables and a little of the gravy and lay the steaks over the top to form an overlapping layer (serve any leftover gravy alongside in a small jug for pouring over). Pile the chips over the meat. Trim the edges of the pastry and crimp the edge. Bake for 40 mins until the chips and pie crust are golden – cover the chips loosely with foil if they are browning too quickly. Scatter over some salt then serve straight from the dish with the leftover gravy (reheated), and the rest of that bottle of red wine."]
'Slow-cooked pork, cider & sage hotpot', ["4 tbsp olive oil, plus a little extra","1kg diced pork shoulder","20g butter, cubed, plus a little extra","4 leeks, trimmed and thickly sliced","4 garlic cloves, crushed","3 tbsp plain flour","500ml dry cider","400ml chicken stock","2 bay leaves","½ small bunch parsley, finely chopped","small bunch sage, leaves picked, 5 left whole, the rest chopped","200ml single cream","400g Maris Piper or King Edward potatoes","400g sweet potatoes"], ["STEP 1","Heat half of the oil in a deep ovenproof frying pan, or flameproof casserole dish, and fry the pork pieces over a medium high heat in batches until seared all over, then transfer to a plate. Add another 1 tbsp oil to the pan, if you need to, while you’re cooking the batches. Once all the pork is seared, transfer to a plate and set aside.","STEP 2","Add another 1 tbsp oil to the pan with a little butter and fry half the leeks with a pinch of salt for 10 mins until tender. Add the garlic, fry for a minute, then stir in the flour.","STEP 3","Pour in the cider, a little at a time, stirring to pick up any bits stuck to the bottom of the pan and to combine everything. Add the stock, bay leaves and seared pork, then simmer, half-covered with a lid for 1-1½ hrs until the meat is just tender (it will later cook to the point of falling apart in the oven). Can be prepared a day ahead.","STEP 4","Heat the oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Simmer uncovered for a few minutes to reduce the sauce, if you need to – it shouldn’t be too liquid or the potatoes will sink into the sauce. Stir in the parsley, chopped sage, remaining leeks, and the cream, then season well.","STEP 5","Peel both types of potatoes and cut into slices 2mm thick, by hand or using a mandoline. Alternate layers of potato and sweet potato in circles over the pie, or randomly, if you prefer. Dot the cubed butter over the top and bake for 1-1½ hrs until the potato is tender. Nestle in the whole sage leaves, brushed in a little oil, for the last 10 mins. Leave to rest for 10 mins before serving."]
'Cottage pie', ["3 tbsp olive oil","1 ¼kg beef mince","2 onions, finely chopped","3 carrots, chopped","3 celery sticks, chopped","2 garlic cloves, finely chopped","3 tbsp plain flour","1 tbsp tomato purée","large glass red wine (optional)","850ml beef stock","4 tbsp Worcestershire sauce","few thyme sprigs","2 bay leaves","1.8kg potatoes, chopped","225ml milk","25g butter","200g strong cheddar, grated","freshly grated  nutmeg"], ["STEP 1","Heat 1 tbsp olive oil in a large saucepan\xa0and fry 1¼ kg beef mince until browned – you may need to do this in batches. Set aside as it browns.","STEP 2","Put the other 2 tbsp olive oil into the pan, add 2 finely chopped onions, 3 chopped carrots and 3 chopped celery sticks and cook on a gentle heat until soft, about 20 mins.","STEP 3","Add 2 finely chopped garlic cloves, 3 tbsp plain flour and 1 tbsp tomato purée, increase the heat and cook for a few mins, then return the beef to the pan.","STEP 4","Pour over a large glass of red wine, if using, and boil to reduce it slightly before adding the 850ml beef stock, 4 tbsp Worcestershire sauce, a few thyme sprigs and 2 bay leaves.","STEP 5","Bring to a simmer and cook, uncovered, for 45 mins. By this time the gravy should be thick and coating the meat. Check after about 30 mins – if a lot of liquid remains, increase the heat slightly to reduce the gravy a little. Season well, then discard the bay leaves and thyme stalks.","STEP 6","Meanwhile, make the mash. In a large saucepan, cover the 1.8kg potatoes which you\'ve peeled and chopped, in salted cold water, bring to the boil and simmer until tender.","STEP 7","Drain\xa0well, then allow to\xa0steam-dry\xa0for a few mins. Mash well with the 225ml milk, 25g butter, and three-quarters of the 200g strong cheddar cheese, then season with freshly grated nutmeg and some salt and pepper.","STEP 8","Spoon the meat into 2\xa0ovenproof dishes. Pipe or spoon on the mash to cover. Sprinkle on the remaining cheese.","STEP 9","If eating straight away, heat oven to 220C/200C fan/gas 7 and cook for 25-30 mins, or until the topping is golden.","STEP 10","If you want to use a slow cooker, brown your mince in batches then tip into your slow cooker and stir in the vegetables, flour, purée, wine, stock, Worcestershire sauce and herbs with some seasoning. Cover and cook on High for 4-5 hours. Make the mash following the previous steps, and then oven cook in the same way to finish."]
'Bean & sausage hotpot', ["8 large sausages (course-cut ones like Toulouse or Cumberland are ideal)","¼ quantity tomato sauce (see \'Goes well with\')","3 x 400g/14oz cans butter beans","1 tbsp black treacle or muscovado sugar","1 tsp English mustard"], ["STEP 1","In a large casserole, fry the sausages until brown all over – about 10 mins.","STEP 2","Add the tomato sauce, stirring well, then stir in the beans, treacle or sugar and mustard. Bring to the simmer, cover and cook for 30 mins. Great served with crusty bread or rice."]
'One-pot sausage casserole with garlic breadcrumbs', ["3 tbsp olive oil, plus an extra drizzle (optional)","8 large pork sausages","1 onion, finely sliced","sprinkle of golden caster sugar","1 tbsp red wine vinegar","1 tbsp tomato purée","½ tsp smoked paprika","400g can chopped tomatoes","100ml red wine","2 bay leaves","400g can butter beans, drained but not rinsed","50g fresh breadcrumbs","2 garlic cloves, finely grated","handful of parsley leaves, roughly chopped"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 220C/200C fan/gas 7. Heat 1 tbsp of the oil in a shallow ovenproof casserole over a medium heat and gently fry the sausages for 5-8 mins, or until brown on all sides. Transfer to a plate using tongs. Tip the onions into the pan and fry for 5-8 mins until beginning to turn golden. Drizzle in a little more oil if the onions start to stick. Sprinkle in the sugar and cook for a minute before stirring in the vinegar, tomato purée and paprika to form a paste. Tip in the tomatoes, then pour the wine into the tomato can, swish it round, and add to the pan. Stir in the bay leaves and beans, then arrange the sausages on top so they’re half-submerged in the sauce but still a little exposed.","STEP 2","Bring the mixture to a simmer, then bake in the oven for 20 mins. Meanwhile, make the topping. Mix the breadcrumbs with the garlic and parsley, then season and stir in 1 tbsp oil. Scatter the topping over the casserole, then drizzle with the remaining 1 tbsp oil and bake for 10 mins more until the breadcrumbs are golden and crisp. Leave to stand for a few minutes, then take to the table and serve from the dish."]
'Sticky toffee apple pudding', ["85g butter, melted","140g self-raising flour","100g golden caster sugar","1 tbsp baking powder","200ml milk","1 egg, beaten","1 tsp vanilla extract","2 Bramley apples  (or other cooking) apples, peeled, cored and sliced","140g dark brown sugar","50g pecan, roughly chopped"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/fan 160C/gas 4. Grease a 2-litre/3½-pint ovenproof dish lightly with butter. Tip the flour, sugar and baking powder, along with a pinch of salt, into a large bowl. Mix together the milk, butter, egg and vanilla extract and stir into the dry ingredients until you get a smooth batter. Arrange the apples in the dish, spoon the batter on top and smooth with a knife until the apples are covered.","STEP 2","For the topping, pour 250ml boiling water over the sugar and stir together until smooth. Pour the liquid over the pudding mixture, then scatter over the pecans. Bake for about 40 mins until the pudding has risen and is golden. Use a big spoon to serve the pudding, making sure you get some of the gooey caramel sauce covering the bottom of the dish. Serve with pouring cream, warm custard or vanilla ice cream."]
'Rigatoni sausage bake', ["400g good quality pork sausage","1 tbsp olive oil","1 onion, chopped","1 large carrot, grated","150ml red wine","300ml vegetable stock","3 tbsp tomato purée","50g butter","50g plain flour","600ml milk","freshly grated nutmeg","500g rigatoni or penne","200g fresh spinach","140g mature cheddar, grated"], ["STEP 1","Slit the sausages and remove them from their skins, then chop them into small pieces. Heat the oil in a pan, add the onion and fry for 5 minutes, until softened and lightly browned. Stir in the sausages and fry until lightly coloured. Add the carrot, then stir in the wine, stock, tomato purée, and season.","STEP 2","Bring to the boil, then simmer uncovered for about 15 minutes until thickened. Taste and season. Set aside.","STEP 3","Put the butter, flour and milk in a pan. Gently heat, whisking, until thickened and smooth. Add a sprinkle of freshly grated nutmeg, season, then simmer for 2 minutes.","STEP 4","Preheat the oven to 190C/Gas 5/fan 170C. Bring a large pan of salted water to the boil. Add the pasta, stir well, then cook, uncovered, for 10-12 minutes, until tender. Remove from the heat, stir in the spinach and, when just wilted, drain well.","STEP 5","Tip half the pasta into a shallow ovenproof dish, about 2.2 litre/4 pint, and level. Spoon over the sausage sauce, then cover with the remaining pasta. Pour the white sauce evenly over the top and sprinkle with the cheddar. Bake for 20-25 minutes until golden brown. Leave for 5 minutes before serving."]
'Sticky pan-roasted sausages with grapes', ["1 tbsp olive oil","450g pack good-quality pork sausage","2 onions , sliced","1 garlic clove , sliced","1 tsp fennel seed","100g grape","2 tbsp red wine vinegar"], ["STEP 1","Heat the olive oil in a large frying pan set over a medium heat, tip in the sausages, then cook for 10 mins, turning every so often. Stir in the onions, then leave to cook for 5 mins more until the sausages are browned and the onions softened.","STEP 2","Tip in the garlic, fennel seeds and grapes and cook for 5 more mins, stirring often, until the grapes are starting to soften. Pour over the vinegar and swirl around the pan. Cook for a few mins more until the onions are sticky and the sausages cooked through. Serve with soft polenta or mashed potato."]
'Next level spaghetti Bolognese', ["olive oil","400g beef mince","400g Italian pork sausages, skinned and crumbled","200g smoked pancetta","1 onion, finely chopped","1 carrot, finely chopped","2 celery sticks, finely chopped","4 garlic cloves, chopped","1 sprig thyme","small bunch fresh basil, small leaves picked and reserved","2 bay leaves","2 tsp dried oregano","handful dried porcini mushrooms","1 tsp golden caster sugar","1 tbsp tomato purée","½ tsp Thai fish sauce","1 tbsp red wine vinegar","100ml whole milk","4 x 400g cans chopped tomatoes","200ml white wine","100g parmesan, grated, rind removed and kept","spaghetti, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat a drizzle of olive oil in a large non-stick frying pan and crumble in the mince and sausagemeat. Spend a good 30 mins cooking the mince – it will release lots of liquid, which you want to evaporate, and then eventually it will end up sizzling in its own fat. If the pan becomes too dry, drizzle in a little more olive oil. Towards the end, continue stirring the mince until it becomes speckled with crisp brown bits.","STEP 2","Heat oven to 140C/120C fan/gas 2. While the mince is browning, heat a drizzle more oil in a casserole dish and sizzle the pancetta for 5 mins until it starts to brown and release its fat, then throw in the vegetables and herbs, and finely crumble over the dried porcini. Cook gently for 5 mins until soft and starting to brown. Sprinkle over the sugar, then stir in the tomato purée and splash in the fish sauce and vinegar. Simmer down until gloopy, then stir through the meat and pour in the milk and tomatoes. Rinse out the tomato tins with the wine and stir into the pan. Season, then nestle in the parmesan rind. Bring to a simmer, then cover and cook in the oven for 3 hrs.","STEP 3","When cooked, tip as many portions of Bolognese as you need into a sauté pan. Cook the pasta until very al dente, then tong into the pan with a bit of the water and finish cooking with the sauce for 2 mins. Stir through the parmesan and a drizzle more olive oil. Twirl the pasta and Bolognese into bowls, scatter with basil and serve with more parmesan."]
'Next level banoffee pie', ["262g pack dark chocolate oat biscuits (we used Hobnobs)","65g butter , melted","4 slightly overripe bananas","4 tbsp light brown soft sugar","1 lime , juiced","397g tin Carnation caramel","80g banana chips , crushed","100g smooth peanut butter","100g icing sugar","340ml double cream"], ["STEP 1","Whizz the biscuits to crumbs in a food processor or put in a strong plastic bag and bash with a rolling pin. Add the butter and whizz again briefly, then tip the buttery crumbs into a 22cm fluted tart tin. Use the back of a spoon to press the crumbs into the tin and up the sides until the whole case is lined. Chill for at least 10 mins.","STEP 2","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 8. Halve the bananas lengthways and tip into a shallow roasting tray or baking dish. Squeeze over the lime juice, scatter with the brown sugar and bake in the oven for 15-20 mins until caramelised. Leave to cool slightly, then thoroughly mash and spread evenly over the tart base.","STEP 3","Tip the caramel into a saucepan, bring to a simmer and bubble for a few minutes to thicken. Add a pinch of flaky sea salt. Crush the banana chips using a rolling pin on a chopping board. Take the pan off the heat and stir in most of the banana chips, then spread the mixture over the banana layer and put back in the fridge for at least 4 hrs to set.","STEP 4","To make the peanut butter cream, beat the peanut butter with the icing sugar and 140ml of the cream until smooth. Whisk the rest of the cream until it just holds its shape, then fold through the peanut butter cream to ripple. Top the tart with pillows of the whipped cream. Scatter with the rest of the crushed banana chips and serve."]
'White velvet soup with smoky almonds', ["2 tsp rapeseed oil","2 large garlic cloves , sliced","2 leeks , trimmed so they’re mostly white in colour, washed well, then sliced (about 240g)","200g cauliflower , chopped","2 tsp vegetable bouillon powder","400g cannellini beans , rinsed","fresh nutmeg , for grating","100ml whole milk","25g whole almonds , chopped","½ tsp smoked paprika","2 x 25g slices rye bread , to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a large pan. Add the garlic, leeks and cauliflower and cook for about 5 mins, stirring frequently, until starting to soften (but not colouring).","STEP 2","Stir in the vegetable bouillon and beans, pour in 600ml boiling water and add a few\xa0generous gratings of the nutmeg. Cover and leave to simmer for 15 mins until the leeks and cauliflower are tender. Add the milk and blitz with a hand blender until smooth and creamy.","STEP 3","Put the almonds in a dry pan and cook very gently for 1 min, or until toasted, then remove from the heat. Scatter the paprika over the almonds and mix well. Ladle the soup into bowls, top with the spicy nuts and serve with the rye bread."]
'Slow-cooker beef goulash', ["3 tbsp olive oil","2kg braising or stewing steak, cut into chunks","2 large onions, finely chopped","4 mixed peppers, cut into 4cm chunks","3 garlic cloves, crushed","2 tbsp flour","2 tsp caraway seeds","2 tsp hot smoked paprika","1 tbsp sweet smoked paprika, plus extra to serve","4 tbsp tomato purée","4 large tomatoes cut into small chunks","400-500ml beef stock","300ml soured cream","small bunch of parsley, chopped"], ["STEP 1","Heat the slow cooker to low and heat 2 tbsp oil in a deep frying pan over a medium heat. Season and sear the beef in batches until brown on all sides. Transfer to a plate.","STEP 2","Put the remaining oil in the pan and fry the onions for 10 mins until lightly golden. Add the peppers and garlic, and fry for another 5-10 mins, then stir in the flour and all of the spices. Cook for 2 mins more, then stir in the tomato purée, tomatoes and 400ml beef stock. Season well. Bring the mixture to a simmer, then tip into the slow cooker with the seared beef. Add the remaining stock,\xa0if needed, to cover the meat completely. Cover and cook for 6-7 hrs until the beef is tender and the sauce has thickened slightly.","STEP 3","Season to taste, then swirl the soured cream and most of the parsley through the stew. Scatter over the remaining parsley and some sweet smoked paprika, then serve with small roasted potatoes or brown rice, if you like."]
'Pear & berry pie', ["plain flour , for dusting","300g sweet shortcrust pastry","freshly grated nutmeg","1 egg , beaten","1 tbsp demerara sugar","custard , cream or ice cream, to serve","75g white caster sugar","1 lemon , pared","5 cardamom pods","½ nutmeg","1 cinnamon stick","3 small pears , peeled cored and halved","3-4 small  pears , peeled cored and chopped","75g white caster sugar","2 tsp cornflour","2 tbsp ground almonds","150g berries (we used raspberries and blackberries)"], ["STEP 1","To make the poached pears, put the sugar in a big saucepan with the lemon peel, cardamom pods, nutmeg, cinnamon and 1 litre water. Bring to a gentle simmer. Lower the pear halves into the liquid and place a circle of baking parchment on top, so they cook through properly. Leave over a medium heat, so that a few bubbles break the surface every now and then, and cook for 15 mins. Allow to cool in the liquid. Can be chilled overnight if making ahead.","STEP 2","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Dust the work surface with a little plain flour. Roll out the pastry so it’s big enough to line a 20-23cm frying pan, pie dish or shallow baking tin. Grate a little nutmeg over the surface, then gently roll again to help it stick. Lift over your dish, press into the corners, then trim the edges. You can give it a pretty crimped edge, if you like, then wrap the off-cuts in cling film and keep in the fridge until needed. Scrunch up a sheet of baking parchment, unfold, and lay it over the pastry. Fill with baking beans and bake for 15 mins. Remove the beans and parchment, brush with some of the beaten egg and return to the oven for another 5 mins.","STEP 3","Meanwhile, make the filling. Cook the remaining pears and sugar in a small pan until the pears are soft enough to squash with the back of a spoon. Drain off 3 tbsp of the poaching liquid and mix this with the cornflour, then pour back into the pears and continue cooking and squashing for another minute or so, until the filling has thickened.","STEP 4","Sprinkle the ground almonds over the pastry case, then add the squashed pear mixture and scatter over the berries. Remove the poached pears from their liquid and blot them on some kitchen paper. Arrange them face-up among the pear mixture and berries. Using a mini pastry cutter, cut little shapes from the leftover pastry, then arrange them on top. Brush the pastry pieces with beaten egg and sprinkle with the demerara sugar. Bake for 45-50 mins until the pastry is golden and berry juice is bubbling. Cool for 10-15 mins before serving with custard, cream or ice cream, if you like."]
'Doughsant', ["125ml milk , at room temperature","2 x 7g sachets dry active yeast","250g plain flour , plus a little for dusting","250g strong white bread flour","60g golden caster sugar","300g unsalted butter , cut into cubes and chilled","vegetable oil","2l vegetable oil","granulated sugar , for dusting","filling of choice (we used lemon curd but jam, dulce de leche or hazelnut chocolate spread works well)","125g icing sugar","choice of edible pearl balls or  sprinkles (we used Dr. Oetker)"], ["STEP 1","Put the milk, 125ml lukewarm water and yeast in a medium bowl and mix to combine, then set aside. Put the flours, sugar and 1 tsp salt into the bowl of a food processor and pulse to combine. Add the cubed butter and pulse until it’s in small pieces. Alternatively, rub in by hand. This is the important stage: you’re not making a bread or a pastry, so don’t over-process the mixture – you need to see chunks of butter around 1cm in size.","STEP 2","Tip the flour mixture onto the milk mixture. Using a spatula or bread scraper, gently fold the dry mixture into the liquid, trying to moisten everything without making the butter any smaller. Once everything is combined into a rough dough, tip the mixture out onto the work surface and lightly knead together to form a ball. Cover with lightly oiled cling film and pop in the fridge for a couple of hours to rest.","STEP 3","On a well-floured work surface, roll the dough out into a roughly 20 x 40cm rectangle. Fold in thirds, like a business letter, brushing off any excess flour. Turn the dough through 90 degrees so that the folds are facing you. Repeat the rolling, folding and turning process twice more. Wrap the dough in cling film and chill overnight before using.","STEP 4","Lightly dust the work surface with flour and roll out the dough to a 20 x 45cm rectangle about 0.5cm thick. Using a 9cm cookie cutter, cut out 10 doughsants. Using a 2.5cm cutter, cut out the hole in each. Arrange on a tray, cover with lightly oiled cling film and allow the doughnuts to prove at room temperature until puffed up – around an hour. When ready to fry, fill a large, thick-bottomed saucepan two-thirds full with vegetable oil, place over a medium heat and bring to 170C on a sugar thermometer. Fry the doughsants 1 or 2 at a time, lowering them in with a slotted spoon.","STEP 5","Fry the doughsants for 1-2 mins each side or until deep golden brown (step 8). Using a metal slotted spoon, remove from the pan and place on a wire rack covered with kitchen paper. Once cooled slightly but still warm, roll the edges of the doughsants in granulated sugar, then set aside to cool completely.","STEP 6","To fill, place your filling of choice into a piping bag fitted with a Bismarck tip (a long thin piping tip used for doughnuts) or a small round piping nozzle. From the bottoms, push the tip into the doughsant at north, south, east and west, piping in a little filling. To decorate, add water to the icing sugar 1 tsp at a time and mix until you have a thick paste the consistency of toothpaste. Pipe a ring of icing on each and top with a few edible pearl balls and some sprinkles. Best served within a couple of hours of frying so that they keep their crispness."]
'Coconut, rum & raisin rice pudding', ["50g butter","150g short-grain pudding rice","150g golden caster sugar","2 x 400ml cans coconut milk","300ml double cream , plus a little extra","1 tsp vanilla extract","150ml spiced rum","100g muscovado sugar","100g raisins"], ["STEP 1","For the rum & raisin syrup, tip all the ingredients into a large saucepan and heat gently over a low heat for 5 mins, or until the sugar has dissolved and created a syrup and the raisins have plumped up. Tip into a bowl, cover and set aside.","STEP 2","In the same saucepan (there’s no need to clean it) melt the butter over a medium heat until sizzling, then scatter over the rice and toast in the hot butter until the butter is just starting to brown. Stir in the sugar, then pour over the coconut milk, cream and vanilla. Bring to a simmer and continue to cook gently for 40-45 mins until the rice is tender, adding a splash more cream if\xa0it becomes too thick.","STEP 3","To serve hot, stir a third of the rum & raisin syrup through the pudding and spoon the rest over the top. To serve cold, leave the pudding to cool, then chill in the fridge to firm up so that you can serve it in scoops with the rum & raisin syrup spooned over."]
'Creamy chicken, squash & pecan pasta', ["1l chicken stock","½ butternut squash , peeled and chopped into small chunks","2 chicken breasts","400g pasta (we used casarecce)","50g cream cheese","75g pecans , chopped","small pack flat-leaf parsley , chopped","25g parmesan grated, plus extra to serve"], ["STEP 1","Pour the stock into a pan and bring to a simmer. Add the squash and chicken, cover and bubble gently for 15 mins, or until the chicken and squash are cooked. If the chicken cooks first, remove from the pan, set aside and keep boiling the squash until tender. Scoop the squash out with a slotted spoon, leaving just the stock in the pan.","STEP 2","Bring the stock back to the boil and add the pasta; the liquid should just cover the pasta. Cook, stirring regularly, until the pasta is just tender and most of the stock has been absorbed (top up with water if necessary). Shred the chicken.","STEP 3","Return the squash to the pan and add the cream cheese, pecans, parsley and parmesan. Simmer for another min or two, then add the chicken. Season and serve with extra parmesan, if you like."]
'Next level steak & ale pie', ["1 tbsp vegetable oil","100g smoked bacon lardons or smoked bacon, chopped","1kg beef shin, cut into large chunks","2 onions, roughly chopped","3 carrots, peeled and cut into large chunks","3 tbsp plain flour","1 tbsp tomato purée","1 tsp malt or red wine vinegar","1 tsp brown miso paste (optional)","400ml sweet brown ale","600ml beef stock made from 2 stock cubes","few thyme sprigs, stalks and leaves separated","2 bay leaves","700g plain flour, plus extra for dusting","2 tsp English mustard powder","150g lard","150g butter, plus extra for the dish","2 egg yolks, beaten"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 160C/140C fan/gas 3. Heat the vegetable oil in a large casserole dish and gently fry the bacon for 5 mins until lightly browned. Remove with a slotted spoon and set aside. In the same pan, brown the beef well in batches for 5-8 mins, adding a drizzle more oil if you need to, then set aside.","STEP 2","Add the onions and carrots to the pan and cook on a low heat for 5 mins. Stir in the flour, then add the tomato purée, vinegar and miso, if using. Tip the beef and bacon, along with any juices, back into the pan and give it all a good stir. Pour in the ale and stock, and nestle in the thyme stalks and bay. Season generously and bring to a simmer. Cover with a lid and cook in the oven for about\xa02 hrs or until the meat is really tender. Leave everything to cool slightly, then strain off about half the braising liquid into another container. Leave to cool completely. Can be made up to two days ahead and kept chilled in the fridge – the pie will be better if the filling is fridge-cold when added. Can also be frozen for up to three months.","STEP 3","To make the pastry, mix the flour, mustard powder, lard and butter with a generous pinch of sea salt until completely combined, then gradually add up to 250ml ice-cold water to make a soft dough. This can be done in a food processor if you prefer. Knead the thyme leaves into the pastry, then cover and leave to rest in the fridge for at least 1 hr. Can be made up to two days ahead and kept chilled, or frozen for up to a month.","STEP 4","Heat the oven to 220C/200C fan/gas 7 and put a baking tray in the oven. Heavily butter a 26-28cm pie dish and dust well with flour. Cut off a third of the pastry and set aside. Roll out the remaining pastry to a thick round that will easily line the pie dish with an overhang, then line the tin. Tip in the beef mixture. You want the filling to be slightly higher than the rim of the dish. Brush the edges with egg yolk. Roll out the remaining pastry to a thick round, big enough to cover the pie, then lift onto the pie dish. Trim the edges, crimp together, then re-roll the trimmings and cut into decorative shapes, such as leaves. Brush the top with more yolk. Make a hole in the centre of the pie with a knife, and put it on the hot baking tray.","STEP 5","Bake for 20 mins, remove, brush again with yolk, scatter with sea salt and bake for 20-25 mins until golden. Leave to rest for 10 mins while you heat up the extra gravy."]
'Satay chicken noodle soup with squash', ["½ small squash or pumpkin (about 300g), deseeded and sliced (no need to peel)","2 tbsp groundnut or vegetable oil","6 skinless chicken thighs","3 garlic cloves , crushed, or 1 tbsp garlic purée","thumb-sized piece of ginger , crushed or 1 tbsp ginger purée","1 chicken stock cube or 1 tbsp concentrated liquid stock","2 x 400g cans coconut milk","3 bird’s-eye chilli , 2 pierced a few times but left whole, 1 finely sliced to serve (optional)","3 tbsp light soy sauce","3 tbsp peanut butter , smooth or crunchy is fine","2 limes , plus extra wedges to serve","1 tbsp light brown soft sugar","1 tbsp fish sauce","400g rice noodles","small bunch spring onions , chopped","small handful coriander leaves","handful beansprouts","50g salted, roasted peanuts , chopped","chilli oil , to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Toss the squash with 1 tbsp oil and some seasoning on a baking tray, arrange in a single layer and roast for 35-40 mins, or until soft and starting to caramelise around the edges. Meanwhile, heat the remaining oil in a deep pan or casserole dish. Season the chicken, then cook until browned all over. Add the garlic and ginger, stirring for a min or 2, then add the stock, coconut milk, whole chillies, soy and 250ml water. Bring to a gentle simmer, cover with a lid and poach the chicken for 20 mins.","STEP 2","Remove the chicken, shred the meat with forks and return to the soup, discarding the bones. Spoon 2-3 tbsp of the soup into a bowl with the peanut butter and mix until smooth. Add to the soup with the juice of 1 lime, the sugar and the fish sauce. Check the seasoning, adding more lime, sugar, soy or fish sauce if you want to. Keep the soup warm while you cook the noodles following pack instructions.","STEP 3","Drain the noodles and add a handful to each bowl. Pour over the soup and top with the squash, spring onions, coriander, beansprouts, peanuts, chilli oil and sliced chilli (if using). Serve with extra lime wedges."]
'Creamy fish & leek pie', ["1½ kg Rooster or Maris Piper potatoes, unpeeled","200ml double cream","50ml milk","50g grated cheddar","50g grated parmesan","100g butter","3 leeks, thinly sliced","¼ tsp ground nutmeg","1½ tbsp wholegrain mustard","100ml dry white wine or dry vermouth","200ml double cream","½ small bunch chives, chopped","½ lemon, zested and juiced","125g skinless smoked haddock, cut into large chunks","125g skinless salmon, cut into large chunks","125g raw king prawns"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Prick each potato a few times with a knife (to prevent them from bursting) and bake on a baking tray for 1 hr-1 hr 30 mins or until soft when pressed. Cut the potatoes in half and scoop out the flesh into a bowl and mash it with a fork or ricer. Save the skins for another day. While the potato is still hot, mix in the cream and milk to make a smooth mash, season and set aside.","STEP 2","While the potatoes are baking, make the fish pie mix. Put a large frying pan on a medium heat. Melt the butter and cook the leeks slowly for 10 mins until they are sweet and tender, then season and add the nutmeg. Stir in the mustard, then pour in the wine and reduce until there is almost no wine left. Pour in the cream and simmer for about 10 mins until reduced by half. Remove from the heat, and add the chives along with the lemon juice and zest. Taste for seasoning.","STEP 3","Stir the haddock, salmon and prawns into the creamed leeks and transfer to a medium baking dish, then top with the mashed potato, smooth over to cover the fish, and scatter over the cheeses. Bake for 25-30 mins until the cheese has turned golden brown."]
'Gratin of fresh & smoked salmon, beetroot, potatoes & dill', ["500-600g piece salmon fillet","200g smoked salmon","850g Maris Piper potatoes , peeled","475ml double cream","175ml soured cream","100ml whole milk","450g cooked beetroot","butter , for the dish","20g dill , roughly chopped","green salad or cabbage, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Using a sharp knife, cut the salmon into slices about ½cm thick (if there\'s skin on your salmon, leave it behind as you cut each slice). Tear the smoked salmon into pieces.","STEP 2","Cut the potatoes into wafer thin slices as if you were making Dauphinoise potatoes. It’s best (and certainly quickest) to do this with a mandoline.","STEP 3","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4 and put in a baking sheet to heat up. Mix the creams and the milk in a large saucepan, and bring to just under the boil. Add the potatoes and cook gently for 5 mins, carefully turning the potatoes over from time to time. Cut the beets into slices about 2mm thick.","STEP 4","Season the potatoes and cream and butter a 22 x 30cm baking dish. Spoon half of the potatoes into the dish and spread them out. Put half the beetroot on top of that, then half the fish.\xa0Season and add half the dill. Now add the rest of the beetroot and fish, seasoning again\xa0and adding the dill. Spoon the rest of the potatoes on top. You don’t need to arrange the top layer of potatoes nicely unless you really want to.","STEP 5","Bake for 1 hr, or until the potatoes are completely tender and the top is bubbling\xa0(it may need an additional 10 mins). Serve with a green salad or, if you want something more comforting, warm cabbage."]
'Golden veggie shepherd’s pie', ["50g butter","2 onions, chopped","4 carrots, diced","1 head of celery, chopped","4 garlic cloves, finely chopped","200g pack  chestnut mushrooms, sliced","2 bay leaves","1 tbsp  dried thyme","500g pack dried green lentils (we used Merchant Gourmet Puy lentils)","100ml red wine (optional)","1.7L vegetable stock","3 tbsp  tomato purée","2kg floury potato, such as King Edwards","85g butter","100ml milk","50g cheddar, grated"], ["STEP 1","To make the sauce, heat 50g\xa0butter in a pan, then gently fry 2 chopped\xa0onions, 4 diced carrots, 1 chopped head of celery and 4 finely chopped garlic cloves\xa0for 15 mins until soft and golden.","STEP 2","Turn up the heat, add 200g sliced chestnut\xa0mushrooms, then cook for 4 mins more.","STEP 3","Stir in 2 bay leaves and 1 tbsp dried thyme, then add 500g green\xa0lentils. Pour over 100ml red\xa0wine and 1.7l vegetable stock – it’s important that you do not season with salt at this stage.","STEP 4","Simmer for 40-50 mins until the lentils are very soft.","STEP 5","Season to taste, take off heat, then stir in 3 tbsp\xa0tomato purée.","STEP 6","While the lentils are cooking, tip 2kg floury\xa0potatoes into a pan of water, then boil for about 15 mins until tender. Drain well, mash with 85g\xa0butter and 100ml milk, then season with salt and pepper.","STEP 7","To assemble the pies, divide the lentil mixture between all the dishes that you are using, then top with mash.","STEP 8","Scatter over 50g grated cheddar\xa0and freeze for up to two months\xa0or if eating that day, heat oven to 190C/fan 170C/gas 5, then bake for 30 mins until the topping is golden."]
'Chilli con carne recipe', ["1 large onion","1 red pepper","2 garlic cloves","1 tbsp oil","1 heaped tsp hot chilli powder  (or 1 level tbsp if you only have mild)","1 tsp paprika","1 tsp ground cumin","500g lean minced beef","1 beef stock cube","400g can chopped tomatoes","½ tsp dried marjoram","1 tsp sugar (or add a thumbnail-sized piece of dark chocolate along with the beans instead, see tip)","2 tbsp tomato purée","410g can red kidney beans","plain boiled long grain rice , to serve","soured cream , to serve"], ["STEP 1","Prepare your vegetables.\xa0Chop\xa01 large onion into small dice, about 5mm square. The easiest way to do this is to cut the onion in half from root to tip, peel it and slice each half into thick matchsticks lengthways, not quite cutting all the way to the root end so they are still held together. Slice across the matchsticks into neat dice.","STEP 2","Cut 1 red pepper in half lengthways, remove stalk and wash the seeds away, then chop.\xa0Peel\xa0and finely chop 2 garlic cloves.","STEP 3","Start cooking. Put your\xa0pan\xa0on the hob over a medium heat. Add 1 tbsp oil and leave it for 1-2 minutes until hot (a little longer for an electric hob).","STEP 4","Add the onion and cook, stirring fairly frequently, for about 5 minutes, or until the onion is soft, squidgy and slightly translucent.","STEP 5","Tip in the garlic, red pepper, 1 heaped tsp hot chilli powder or 1 level tbsp mild chilli powder, 1 tsp paprika and 1 tsp ground cumin.","STEP 6","Give it a good stir, then leave it to cook for another 5 minutes, stirring occasionally.","STEP 7","Brown 500g lean minced beef.\xa0Turn the heat up a bit, add the meat to the pan and break it up with your spoon or spatula. The mix should sizzle a bit when you add the mince.","STEP 8","Keep stirring and prodding for at least 5 minutes, until all the mince is in uniform, mince-sized lumps and there are no more pink bits. Make sure you keep the heat hot enough for the meat to fry and become brown, rather than just stew.","STEP 9","Make the sauce. Crumble 1 beef stock cube into 300ml hot water. Pour this into the pan with the mince mixture.","STEP 10","Add a 400g can of chopped tomatoes. Tip in ½ tsp dried marjoram, 1 tsp sugar and add a good shake of salt and pepper. Squirt in about 2 tbsp tomato purée and stir the sauce well.","STEP 11","Simmer it gently. Bring the whole thing to the boil, give it a good stir and put a lid on the pan. Turn down the heat until it is gently bubbling and leave it for 20 minutes.","STEP 12","Check on the pan occasionally to stir it and make sure the sauce doesn’t catch on the bottom of the pan or isn’t drying out. If it is, add a couple of tablespoons of water and make sure that the heat really is low enough. After simmering gently, the saucy mince mixture should look thick, moist and juicy.","STEP 13","Drain and rinse a 410g can of red kidney beans in a sieve and stir them into the chilli pot. Bring to the boil again, and gently bubble without the lid for another 10 minutes, adding a little more water if it looks too dry.","STEP 14","Taste a bit of the chilli and season. It will probably take a lot more seasoning than you think.","STEP 15","Now replace the lid, turn off the heat and leave your chilli to stand for 10 minutes before serving. This is really important as it allows the flavours to mingle.","STEP 16","Serve with soured cream and plain boiled long grain rice."]
'The big double cheeseburger & secret sauce', ["1 small  onion, finely chopped","4 sesame-topped burger buns","300g steak mince","1 tbsp sunflower oil","small wedge of iceberg lettuce, finely shredded","2 slices of mild  cheddar or burger cheese","1 gherkin sliced lengthways","oven fries, to serve","100g mayonnaise","1 tbsp American mustard","large pinch garlic granules","large pinch onion granules","¼ tsp smoked paprika","1 tbsp white wine vinegar","1 tsp pickle relish or finely chopped gherkin"], ["STEP 1","Tip the onions into a small bowl and pour over boiling water from the kettle until just covered. Leave to cool. Put all the sauce ingredients in another small bowl, then add 1 tbsp of the cooled onion water and mix until everything is evenly combined. Set aside.","STEP 2","Halve two of the burger buns, then cut a thick slice from the middles of the other two buns. Toast or grill the middle slices on both sides and the other buns only on the cut sides, then set aside. Heat the oven to 100C/80C fan/gas 2.","STEP 3","Divide the mince into four loose piles and season. Heat ¼ tbsp of the oil in a heavy frying pan or skillet over a high heat and put one of the piles of beef in the pan. Working quickly, cover with a square of baking parchment and carefully use a second pan to press the beef patties down – be careful of the heat and rising steam as you do this. Keep the patties pressed down for about 10 seconds, then remove the weight and the paper, and leave the burger to cook for 2 mins more. Turn the patties and press down using a spatula, cooking for another 1 min. Transfer to a tray and keep warm in the oven while you cook the other burgers in the same way.","STEP 4","When all the patties are cooked, it’s time to assemble the burgers. Spread some sauce over the bun bases, scatter with onions, then add lettuce, followed by a cheese slice, then a patty, a few gherkin slices and a middle slice of toasted bun. Spread over more sauce, then add more onions, lettuce, another patty and the bun tops. Serve with the oven fries and extra sauce on the side, if you like."]
'Chicken arrabbiata stew & parmesan dumplings', ["2 tbsp olive oil","1 onion, thinly sliced","8 skinless and boneless chicken thighs, halved","2 large garlic cloves, crushed","1-1½ tsp chilli flakes","4 tbsp sun-dried tomato pesto","250ml chicken stock","2 x 400g can chopped tomatoes","5 thyme sprigs, tied","2 tsp sugar","½ small bunch of parsley, finely chopped","80g cold unsalted butter, cubed","150g self-raising flour","80g parmesan, grated","50-60ml milk"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a large shallow casserole dish. Fry the onion over a low-medium heat for 7 mins or until soft and turning translucent. Turn up the heat slightly, add the chicken and fry for 5 mins until beginning to brown around the edges. Tip the garlic and chilli into the casserole and fry for 1 min. Stir through the pesto, pour in the stock and tomatoes, then add the thyme, sugar and some seasoning.\xa0 Turn the heat to low and cover with a lid. Cook gently for 40 mins. Remove the thyme and check the seasoning.","STEP 2","Heat the oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. To make the dumplings, put the butter and flour in a bowl with ½ tsp fine salt, then rub the butter into the flour with your fingertips until it resembles fine breadcrumbs. Mix in 50g of the cheese and pour in 50ml of the milk, then swiftly combine with a cutlery knife until everything is well distributed and you have a soft dough (add more milk if it’s too dry). Briefly bring the dough together on a worksurface, then divide into eight balls.","STEP 3","Arrange the dumplings over the stew, then scatter each with the remaining cheese. Put in the oven and bake, uncovered, for 25 mins or until the dumplings are doubled in size and golden brown. Scatter over the parsely and serve."]
'Toffee apple bread & butter pudding', ["3 red dessert apples","juice 1/2 lemon","4 tbsp golden caster sugar","397g can caramel (we used Carnation)","6 brioche finger rolls, sliced into rounds","3 eggs","400ml full-fat milk","200ml double cream","1 tsp vanilla extract","ice cream , to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Core the apples, then slice into rings about as thick as a 50p piece. Toss through the lemon juice and 2 tbsp sugar. Spread about 2 /3 of the caramel over the base of a large baking dish (ours was 20 x 30cm).","STEP 2","Layer the brioche and apple rings in the dish in overlapping lines. Dot spoonfuls of the leftover caramel here and there, leaving bits of apple poking out.In a jug, whisk the eggs, milk, cream, vanilla extract and 1 tbsp sugar. Pour the mixture over the brioche and apples, making sure it’s all well covered, then wrap in cling film. Set aside for at least 30 mins, or overnight, in the fridge.","STEP 3","Heat oven to 170C/150C fan/gas 3. Uncover the pudding and scatter with the remaining 1 tbsp sugar. Bake for 45-50 mins until the top is golden and the custard has set. The caramel should be bubbling around the edges and the pudding puffed up. Serve with vanilla ice cream, if you like."]
'Root veg & pancetta toad-in-the-hole with onion gravy', ["140g plain flour , plus 2 tbsp for the gravy","1 tsp baking powder","4 rosemary sprigs, leaves picked and chopped","4 large eggs","200ml milk","70g pack  pancetta slices","600g mixed root vegetable , peeled and cut into wedges or batons (we used carrots, parsnips and beetroot)","2 small  red onions , cut into wedges","3 tbsp vegetable oil","4 tbsp onion chutney","3 tbsp balsamic vinegar","500ml beef stock","peas , to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 220C/200C fan/gas 7. Mix the flour, baking powder, rosemary, eggs and milk in a jug. Set aside.","STEP 2","Wrap the pancetta slices around some of the root veg, then tip into a large roasting tin. Add the onions, season and drizzle with the oil. Bake for 25 mins. Increase oven to 240C/220C fan/gas 9.","STEP 3","Remove the tin from the oven and pour in the batter mixture. Return to the oven and bake for 10 mins until puffed up and golden, then lower to 220C/200C fan/gas 7 and bake for a further 15 mins.","STEP 4","To make the gravy, put the onion chutney, balsamic vinegar and flour into a saucepan, stir well, then bubble for 1-2 mins over a medium heat. Pour in the stock and whisk until smooth, then bring to a simmer and bubble for 5 mins until thickened. Serve the toad-in-the-hole with the onion gravy and peas, if you like."]
'Homemade custard', ["200ml double cream","700ml whole milk","4 large egg yolks","3 tbsp cornflour","100g caster sugar","1 tsp vanilla extract"], ["STEP 1","Put the cream and milk into a large pan and gently bring to just below boiling point. Meanwhile, in a large bowl, whisk the yolks, cornflour, sugar and vanilla. Gradually pour the hot milk mixture onto the sugar mixture, whisking constantly.","STEP 2","Wipe out the saucepan and pour the mixture back into it. Heat gently, stirring with a wooden spoon (see Steps 1 and 2, for stirring tips) until the custard is thickened, but before any lumps form. Eat hot or cold."]
'Butternut macaroni cheese', ["1 large butternut squash , peeled and cut into 2.5cm/1in chunks","2 tsp olive oil","300g macaroni","50g butter","50g plain flour","1 tsp English mustard powder","500ml milk","200g extra-mature cheddar or vegetarian alternative, grated","50g parmesan or vegetarian alternative, grated"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 220C/200C fan/gas 7. Toss the squash with the olive oil and some seasoning, and roast on a baking sheet for 15-20 mins until tender. Meanwhile, cook the macaroni following pack instructions, then drain.","STEP 2","Melt the butter in a pan and stir in the flour and mustard powder to make a paste. Gradually whisk in the milk and simmer to thicken to a smooth sauce, stirring constantly.","STEP 3","Take the sauce off the heat and mash in a third of the squash with the cheddar and half the Parmesan. Season, then stir in the drained macaroni with the remaining squash. Tip into an ovenproof dish, scatter with the remaining Parmesan and bake for 15 mins until golden and bubbling."]
'Next level fish pie', ["150g butter","1 shallot , finely chopped","400g shell-on raw prawns , peeled, heads and shells kept for stock","400g smoked haddock , skinned and trimmed (reserve these), flesh diced into large chunks","1 bay leaf","1 star anise","small splash Pernod (optional)","150ml white wine","1.2l whole milk","1 tsp vegetable bouillon powder or 1 vegetable stock cube","60g plain flour","200ml low fat crème fraîche","400g skinless white fish fillet, diced into large chunks","200g salmon fillet, diced into large chunks","2 tbsp capers , drained and finely chopped","1 lemon , juiced","1 ½kg King Edward potatoes","4 eggs (optional)","gruyère or medium cheddar","40g pack ready salted  crisps","spinach , peas or watercress, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat 25g of the butter in a shallow pan and sizzle the shallot for 2 mins. Add the prawn heads, shells and smoked haddock skin and trimmings, turn up the heat and cook for 5 mins until they start to brown. Throw in the bay and star anise, then splash in the pernod if using and then the wine. Boil everything down until practically evaporated, then pour over 1 litre of milk and sprinkle in the vegetable bouillon. Simmer everything for 15 mins, turn off the heat, crush the shells with a potato masher and strain into a jug.","STEP 2","Clean out the pan and melt 60g of butter, stir in the flour so you have a sandy paste and cook for 2 mins on a low heat. Gradually stir in the flavoured milk, then the crème fraîche, and simmer gently to make a very thick sauce. Season to taste. Turn off the heat and gently fold through all the fish and prawns, capers and lemon juice. Scrape into a large buttered baking dish.","STEP 3","Heat oven to 220C/200C fan/gas 8. Bring the potatoes to the boil in a large pan of water, add the eggs and simmer for 8 mins. Scoop out the eggs, put in a bowl of cold water to cool, then peel, halve and push into the sauce. Drain the potatoes and mash with the remaining milk and butter. Spread or pipe the mash over the pie. Sprinkle with gruyère and/or crush over crisps. Put the pie on a baking tray and cook for 35 mins until golden and just bubbling over. Leave to sit for at least 10 mins before eating with buttered spinach, peas or watercress."]
'Stuffed pasta bake bolognese', ["250g large pasta shells or conchiglioni","200g mascarpone","2 x 125g balls mozzarella , drained and finely chopped","large bunch basil , roughly chopped, plus a few whole leaves to serve","3 garlic cloves , crushed","parmesan , to serve","1 tbsp olive oil","1 onion , finely diced","1 celery stick , finely diced","1 carrot , finely diced","400g beef mince","2 garlic cloves , crushed","250ml red wine","1 tbsp tomato purée","3 bay leaves","2 x 400g cans chopped tomatoes","pinch of sugar","1-2 tsp balsamic vinegar"], ["STEP 1","To make the bolognese, heat the oil in a wide ovenproof pan over a medium heat. Fry the onion, celery and carrot with some seasoning for 20 mins until soft and lightly golden. Tip in the beef mince, turn up the heat and fry, stirring regularly, for another 10 mins until the mince browns. Add the garlic, fry for a minute, then pour in the wine and bubble for a few mins more, scraping the pan to release any bits. Stir through the purée, bay leaves and tomatoes, with a canful of water. Simmer for 1½ hrs, covered for the first hour, then remove the lid and bubble until the tomatoes have broken down. Season with salt, pepper, the sugar and balsamic vinegar.","STEP 2","Tip the pasta shells into a large heatproof bowl with a pinch of salt, and pour over a kettle of boiled water. Cover and leave to soften for 15-20 mins – they need to retain some firmness so you can fill them.","STEP 3","Heat the oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 4 and drain the pasta. Use a fork to mash the mascarpone with the mozzarella, chopped basil, garlic and some black pepper in a bowl.","STEP 4","The bolognese should be a little wetter than you’d like as the pasta shells will absorb some of the liquid as it bakes. Remove from the heat, giving it a final stir. Using a teaspoon, fill the pasta shells with some of the mascarpone mixture, pressing the mix in with your index finger. Nestle the shells into the sauce, filled-side up. Bake for 20-30 mins until the top is golden and bubbling, and the pasta is tender. Grate over some parmesan and finish with a few basil leaves."]
'Treacle apple pudding', ["2-3  Bramley apples , peeled, cored and chopped (about 250g flesh)","100g light soft   brown sugar","50g golden syrup , plus 2 tbsp","butter , for greasing","1 tangy eating apple , such as Braeburn","squeeze of  lemon juice","175g self-raising flour","1 tsp bicarbonate of soda","2 tsp ground cinnamon","1 tsp ground ginger","1 large egg"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Put the chopped Bramleys in a saucepan, add 100ml water and bring to the boil. Cover and cook for 5 mins until the apples are very soft. Beat to a purée with a wooden spoon. Add the sugar and 50g of the syrup, bring to a simmer, then set aside and cool.","STEP 2","While you wait, grease the inside of a 1.3-litre pudding basin. Spoon 2 tbsp syrup into the bottom. Peel and core the eating apple, slice half and chop the rest. Toss in the lemon juice and nestle the sliced apple into the syrup in the bottom of the basin.","STEP 3","Sift the flour, bicarb and spices into a bowl and add a pinch of salt. Beat the egg into the saucy apple, then tip this and the remaining chopped apple into the bowl and stir until smooth. It will start to rise a little as you mix. Quickly turn the batter into the basin, level the top, then bake for 40-45 mins or until well risen and a skewer inserted comes out clean. Cover with foil towards the end of cooking if the sponge browns too quickly. Leave to rest for a few mins, then turn out onto a plate."]
'Melty cheese & potato pie', ["750g floury potatoes (such as King Edwards), sliced","100ml crème fraîche","pinch of freshly grated nutmeg","plain flour, for dusting","2 x 375g  blocks of all-butter puff pastry","250g round camembert (or vegetarian alternative)","1 egg, beaten","1 shallot, finely chopped","2 tsp Dijon mustard","2 tbsp red wine vinegar","100ml olive oil","500g chicory (I used red and white for colour contrast), leaves separated"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 220C/200C fan/gas 7. Tip the potatoes into a pan of cold water, bring up to the boil and cook for 2 mins. Drain well, tip back into the saucepan and mix with the crème fraîche. Season, sprinkle over the nutmeg and set aside.","STEP 2","Dust your work surface with flour, roll the first block of pastry to a circle about 28cm wide and place on a baking tray. Arrange a third of the potatoes in the middle of the pastry, then sit the cheese on top. Pile the rest of the potato around the cheese, leaving a 1cm border at the edge of the pastry.","STEP 3","Roll the remaining pastry out to a circle about 30cm wide, dusting with more flour if needed. Brush the edges of the pastry on the tray with egg, then drape over the larger circle and seal the sides well, crimping as you go round. A tight seal is important to stop the cheese escaping.","STEP 4","Brush all over with egg and lightly score a spiral into the pastry with the back of a knife. Bake the pie for 30 mins until golden brown and puffed up. As soon as the pie comes out of the oven, glaze with a little more egg and leave to cool for 5 mins.","STEP 5","Meanwhile, whisk the shallot, mustard, vinegar and oil together. Place the chicory in a bowl and toss with the dressing. Serve the pie cut into oozy wedges, with the salad on the side."]
'Easy chocolate brownie cake', ["175g unsalted butter, plus extra for greasing","225g dark chocolate, broken into pieces","200g caster sugar","3 medium eggs, separated","65g plain flour","50g chopped pecan nuts"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/fan 160C/gas 4. Butter a 20-25cm cake tin and line with greaseproof paper.","STEP 2","Place 175g/6oz of the chocolate, plus the butter and sugar in a heavy-based pan and heat gently until melted, stirring occasionally. Leave to cool.","STEP 3","Whisk the egg yolks into the chocolate mixture, then add the flour, nuts and the remaining chocolate.","STEP 4","Whisk the egg whites until they form soft peaks, then gently, but thoroughly, fold into the chocolate mixture.","STEP 5","Pour into the prepared tin and bake in the centre of the oven for about 35-40 mins until crusty on top. Leave to cool, then run a knife around the sides and remove from the tin. Dust with icing sugar and serve warm with custard or ice cream or cold with cream."]
'Classic bread & butter pudding', ["600ml double cream","8 large egg yolks","175g caster sugar , plus extra to top the pudding","16 slices white bread , crusts removed","75g unsalted butter , softened, for spreading","100g raisins","¼-½ whole nutmeg , for grating","ice cream , to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat the cream in a pan until boiling. Meanwhile, whisk the egg yolks and sugar together in a large bowl with an electric\xa0whisk until light and fluffy, about 3-5 mins. Pour the hot cream over the eggs, whisking continuously, and when everything is mixed, set aside.","STEP 2","Spread the bread with the butter, and cut into triangles. Arrange in a shallow baking dish, about 20 x 26 x 5cm, buttered-side up, in three layers, sprinkling the raisins and finely grating some nutmeg over the bottom two layers and leaving the top layer clear. Pour over the warm custard, lightly pressing the bread down with your fingers to help it soak in. Leave to stand for at least 20 mins before cooking. Can be prepared up to this stage several hours ahead, chilled and cooked when needed.","STEP 3","Heat the oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Sit the dish in a large roasting tin and pour a kettleful of hot water into the roasting tin so it comes three-quarters of the way up the outside of the dish. Bake in the oven for 20-25 mins until the custard is just set.","STEP 4","Remove the pudding from its water bath and scatter the top liberally with more sugar. Caramelise the top under a hot grill or with a blowtorch – take it really far (a few burnt edges add to the flavour), but be careful it doesn’t catch. Leave the pudding to rest for 5 mins, then serve with your favourite ice cream – I like bitter orange marmalade ice cream."]
'Bangers and mash with onion gravy', ["1 tbsp sunflower oil","8 pork sausages (the best quality you can find)","small knob of butter","3 small onions, finely sliced","1 thyme sprig","1 bay leaf","pinch of sugar","1 heaped tsp plain flour","1 tbsp red wine vinegar","1 glass red wine","1 tsp soy sauce","400ml beef stock made with 1 stock shot or cube","1 kg King Edward potatoes, peeled and cut into large chunks","100ml whole milk or 50ml milk and 50ml cream","50g cold butter, diced","grating of nutmeg"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Heat the oil in an ovenproof frying pan and gently sizzle the sausages over a medium-high heat for 8-10 mins, turning them, until browned on all sides. Transfer to a plate, then put the butter in the pan and heat until sizzling. Scatter in the onions, stirring them into the butter, then add the thyme sprig, bay and sugar. Give everything a final stir, then put the sausages on top and drizzle over any juices from the plate. Roast everything for 20 mins, turning the sausages halfway through.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, make the mash. Tip the potatoes into a pan of cold salted water and bring to the boil, then turn down and simmer for 10-12 mins or until just cooked all the way through (the tip of a knife should slide in easily). Drain in a colander and leave for a minute. Tip the milk into the pan and bring to a simmer, then pass the potatoes through a ricer into the hot milk and mash thoroughly. Once mashed, beat with a wooden spoon or spatula over very low heat, then beat in the butter a few bits at a time. You should have extra-fluffy, smooth mash. Keep it warm.","STEP 3","When the sausages are cooked, remove from the oven, turn the oven off and lift the sausages onto a tray. Return them to the oven to keep warm. Put the pan back on the heat and give the roasted onions a stir, they should be sticky and slightly burnt around the edges. Sizzle for a minute or two more to caramelise, then stir in the flour and cook for another minute. Splash in the vinegar, simmer for a minute, then pour over the red wine and soy, and bubble down to a gloopy paste. Pour over the stock and boil for 3-4 mins, or until you have a rich gravy. If you prefer, scoop out the thyme and bay, or just leave it in. Tip into a bowl or gravy jug with a serving spoon for the onions. Bring everything to the table and scoop a big mound of mash onto the middle of each plate, then top with the sausages and gravy."]
'Pear parkin pudding with custard', ["200g porridge oats","200g self-raising flour","2 tsp ground ginger","¼ tsp salt","175g treacle","140g butter , plus extra for the dish and dotting over","140g light muscovado sugar , plus a bit more","2 balls stem ginger from a jar, chopped, plus some of the syrup to serve","1 large egg","150ml milk","4 ripe pears , peeled, stalks cut off, cored and halved","custard , to serve (see recipe below)"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 160C/140C fan/gas 3. Butter a 30 x 20cm baking dish. Mix the first four ingredients together. Melt the treacle, butter and sugar together in a large saucepan, then stir in the dry ingredients, half of the chopped ginger, the egg and milk to give a smooth batter.","STEP 2","Spoon into the baking dish, then sit the pear halves in the batter. Dot more butter over each pear half and sprinkle with a little more sugar. Bake for 1 hr until risen all over and a skewer inserted into the middle of the pudding comes out clean.","STEP 3","To serve, scatter the rest of the ginger over the fruit, then drizzle all over with syrup from the jar. Serve in rectangles with custard, below."]
'Beef & Guinness stew with bacon dumplings', ["2 tbsp vegetable oil","1kg boneless beef shin, cut into 3cm chunks","200g pearl onions or small shallots","4 medium carrots, chopped to the same size as the shallots","3 celery sticks, cut into bite-sized chunks","3 tbsp plain flour","500ml beef or chicken stock","500ml Guinness","1 large  thyme sprig","4 star anise","buttered cabbage and mash, to serve","100g smoked bacon, finely minced","½ tbsp oil","1 tsp thyme leaves","125g self-raising flour","60g beef suet","1 egg yolk","small pack parsley, leaves picked and finely chopped"], ["STEP 1","First, make the dumplings. Gently fry the bacon until crisp in a large lidded casserole dish. Stir in the thyme leaves, then tip into a bowl and leave to cool slightly. Add the flour and suet to the bacon, and stir everything together. Make a well in the middle, then add the egg yolk, parsley, ½ tsp pepper and 2 tbsp very cold water, and start to mix into a dough. Keep adding water until you a have a firm but pliable dough. Divide the mixture into eight balls and chill until needed.","STEP 2","Heat oven to 160C/140C fan/gas 3. Quickly clean the casserole dish with some kitchen paper, then heat the oil. Brown the meat really well in batches, then set aside. Tip in the onions or shallots, carrots and celery, brown well, then stir in the flour. Add the meat and any juices back into the dish, give everything a good stir, then pour in the stock and Guinness. Season, then tuck in the thyme and star anise and bring everything to a simmer. Cover with a lid, then cook in the oven for about 2 hrs until the meat is tender.","STEP 3","Remove the stew from the oven and arrange the dumplings evenly on top. Put the lid back on and return to the oven for 20 mins, then cook for a final 10 mins with the lid off to brown the dumplings. Bring the dish to the table in all its glory. Spoon into bowls with cabbage and mash, to serve."]
'Hot chocolate milkshakes', ["200g plain chocolate (we used 70% cocoa)","600ml full-fat milk","vanilla ice cream","mini marshmallows","a nip of  rum or brandy for the adults (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Break 200g plain chocolate (I used 70% cocoa) into cubes and put into a pan with 600ml full-fat milk. Gently heat until the chocolate melts, then bring almost to the boil, whisking regularly until even and smooth. Can be made ahead, then chilled for up to 2 days.","STEP 2","Re-heat if necessary, whisking, then ladle or pour into heatproof glasses or mugs. Top with scoops vanilla ice cream and mini marshmallows. Add a nip of rum or brandy for the adults, if you like."]
'Sticky ginger skillet parkin', ["200g salted butter , chopped","85g light brown soft sugar","85g treacle","185g golden syrup","250g self-raising flour","2 tsp ground ginger","1 tsp mixed spice","100g porridge oats","2 large eggs","2 tbsp milk","2 balls stem ginger from a jar, chopped, plus 2 tbsp syrup from the jar, and extra to serve","custard or ice cream, to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 150C/130C fan/gas 2. Put a heavy-bottomed 25cm ovenproof frying pan or skillet over a low heat and gently melt the butter, sugar, treacle and golden syrup together, stirring with a wooden spoon, until the butter is just melted and everything is combined. Remove from the heat and leave to cool slightly for 5-10 mins.","STEP 2","Sieve the flour and spices together, then mix in the oats. Whisk the eggs, milk, stem ginger and ginger syrup together in a bowl or jug. Stir the dry ingredients into the cooled butter mixture until well combined. Stir in the ginger, milk and egg mixture until you have a thick cake batter. Transfer to the oven and bake for 45-50 mins until firm and risen. Serve scooped from the pan with extra ginger syrup and custard or ice cream, if you like, or leave to cool and eat cold. Will keep, wrapped in baking parchment, for up to seven days.","Rum & raisin parkin\\nPour rum over a handful of raisins and leave to soak overnight. Mix most into the batter, then serve with with extra raisins scattered over.\xa0\\nSticky pear & parkin sundaes\xa0\\nPile cubes of parkin into glasses with a chopped canned pear, toffee ice cream and some ginger syrup mixed with whisky. Top with toasted pecans.\xa0\\nCaramelised banana, parkin & custard\\nFry a sliced banana in butter until golden, add a drizzle of golden syrup and carefully toss. Serve over parkin with thick custard."]
'Roast aubergine parmigiana', ["2 tbsp extra-virgin olive oil","2 garlic cloves , crushed","small bunch basil , stalks finely chopped","2 x 400g cans  cherry tomatoes","1 tbsp chopped sundried or semi-dried tomato","1 tsp clear honey","few  thyme sprigs, leaves removed","4 medium aubergines","2 balls light  mozzarella , thinly sliced","25g breadcrumb","25g parmesan (or vegetarian alternative), finely grated","crusty bread , to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat 1 tbsp of the oil in a pan. Soften the garlic and the basil stalks for 1 min, without letting the garlic colour. Add both types of tomatoes, the honey, most of the thyme leaves and plenty of seasoning. Simmer for 5 mins – you don’t want the sauce to reduce too much at this stage.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Cut 6 slits down into the flesh of each aubergine crosswise, taking care not to cut all the way through. Season inside, then push a slice of the mozzarella and a basil leaf into each gap.","STEP 3","Pour the tomato sauce into a large baking dish and sit the aubergines in it (or use 4 individual dishes). Drizzle with the remaining oil. Cover with foil and scrunch it tightly at the edges. Bake for 50 mins-1 hr until soft.","STEP 4","Remove the foil. Mix the breadcrumbs and Parmesan, and scatter over the aubergines with the rest of the thyme. Bake, uncovered, for another 15 mins or until the aubergines are very tender and the crumbs are golden and crisp. (The best way to tell if they are ready is to prod the largest aubergine in the centre with a skewer.) Let the dish rest for 5 mins, then scatter over the rest of the basil leaves. Serve with crusty bread, if you like."]
'IPA treacle tart', ["250g plain flour , plus extra for dusting","125g unsalted butter , chilled and chopped","75g icing sugar","2 egg yolks","700g golden syrup","50g honey","250g breadcrumbs","½  grapefruit , zest only","100ml red IPA  (we used Siren Liquid Mistress)","3 medium eggs","honeycomb , broken into shards (optional)"], ["STEP 1","To make the pastry, put the flour and butter in a bowl and rub together with your fingertips until it resembles breadcrumbs. Mix in the icing sugar followed by the yolks. If the pastry feels too dry, add 2 tbsp water. Shape into a ball, flatten it out into a disc, wrap it in cling film, then chill for 30 mins.","STEP 2","Roll out the pastry on a lightly floured surface until big enough to line a 23cm fluted tart tin, about 3cm deep. Line the tin with the pastry, allowing the edges to overhang. Chill for another 30 mins.","STEP 3","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Line the tart with baking parchment and baking beans. Bake blind for 20 mins. Remove the beans and parchment and bake for 10-15 mins more until the pastry is golden and crisp.","STEP 4","While the pastry is cooking, mix the golden syrup, honey, breadcrumbs, grapefruit zest, beer and eggs together in a large jug or bowl.","STEP 5","Lower oven to 160C/140C fan/gas 3. Use a small serrated knife to trim the pastry edges, then fill with the treacle mixture. Bake for 55 mins-1 hr until golden. Scatter over the honeycomb shards before serving, if you like."]
'Chicken & leek mini pies', ["25g butter","3 leeks , washed and sliced","350g tub fresh cheese sauce","½ bunch chives , chopped","200g cooked chicken , torn or cut into bite-sized chunks)","3 tbsp milk","1 tbsp Dijon mustard","320g pack ready-rolled  shortcrust pastry","plain flour , for dusting","1 large egg , beaten"], ["STEP 1","In a large pan, melt the butter and cook the leeks, covered, for 10 mins until really soft. Remove from the heat and stir through the cheese sauce, chives, chicken, milk and mustard. Mix well and spoon into small dishes or ramekins.","STEP 2","Un-roll the pastry on a lightly floured surface. Use a saucer to cut circles for the pie tops. Place on top, trim to fit, crimp the edges and brush with egg to glaze. Wrap tightly in cling film and freeze for up to 2 months.","STEP 3","To cook from frozen, heat oven to 220C/200C fan/gas 7. Remove the cling film, cover with foil and put on a baking tray in the middle of the oven. Bake for 15 mins, then reduce the temperature to 190C/170C fan/gas 5 and bake for a further 45 mins, removing the foil for the final 30 mins. Serve with green vegetables.","STEP 4","To cook from fresh, heat oven to 190C/170C fan/gas 5. Cook for 45 mins, until the pastry is golden and puffed, and the filling is piping hot."]
'Moroccan harira & chicken soup', ["3 tbsp olive oil , plus extra to drizzle","4 boneless, skinless chicken thighs","1 leek , washed and finely sliced","4 fat  celery sticks, chopped into small pieces","3 large carrots , chopped into small pieces","2 big parsnips , peeled and chopped into small pieces","small pack  coriander , stalks finely chopped, leaves reserved to serve","1 tbsp cumin seeds","2 tsp ground cumin","2 tsp ground coriander","2 tsp ground cinnamon","2 tsp ground turmeric","2 tbsp harissa (we used Belazu)","2 x 400g cans chopped tomatoes","2 chicken stock cubes , crumbled","85g raw green  lentils","zest and juice 1  lemon","1 tbsp golden caster sugar","natural yogurt , toast and hummus, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat half the oil in a frying pan, season the thighs and brown really well on both sides. Remove to a plate. Tip a mug of water into the pan and simmer, scraping up all the browned bits. Tip this liquid into a measuring jug for later.","STEP 2","Put the remaining oil, the vegetables and coriander stalks in a big saucepan. Gently cook until the veg is softened – about 5 mins. Stir in the spices, turn up the heat, and cook for a few mins. Stir in the harissa, followed by the tomatoes, the chicken, stock cubes and lentils. Top up your jug of chickeny juices to 500ml with water, then add this, too. Bring to a simmer, cover and cook for 30 mins.","STEP 3","Lift the chicken from the soup and shred finely using a couple of forks. Return to the soup with the lemon zest and juice, sugar, and season to taste. Ladle into bowls with a dollop of yogurt and the coriander leaves, and serve with toast, spread with hummus and drizzled with oil."]
'Lamb & Dauphinoise hotpot', ["3 large carrots , cut into large chunks","1 onion , roughly chopped","1 garlic bulb, split in 2","few sprigs rosemary","few sprigs thyme","2 bay leaves","1 tbsp tomato purée","1 shoulder of lamb on the bone, about 2.5kg","1 bottle  red wine","4-5  potatoes (the roundest you have)","4 sweet potatoes (the roundest you have)","150ml double cream","few knobs of butter"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. In a flameproof casserole dish that is large enough to fit the lamb, snugly scatter over all the vegetables and herbs, and roughly stir in the tomato purée. Sit the lamb on top, pour over the bottle of wine and season generously. Cover the dish and heat up on top of the stove, then put in the oven and leave undisturbed for 3 hrs. Remove from the oven, leave to cool, then chill overnight.","STEP 2","The next day, remove all the hard fat from around the lamb and discard. Lift the lamb out of the dish, scraping away and keeping any of the jellified juices. Pull apart and shred the meat, discarding any large pieces of fat and the bones. Put the lamb back in the dish, then spoon over the jellied sauce and mix with the vegetables. Set aside.","STEP 3","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. To ￼￼￼￼make the topping, peel and neatly slice the potatoes by hand into rounds. Place in a pan of cold, salted water, bring to a hard boil and drain straight away. Tip back into the pan, pour over the cream and season. Now it’s up to you how fancy you want to be – you can pile the potatoes over the lamb casually, or you can arrange the potato and sweet potato in interleaving circles. Drizzle over any remaining cream from the pan and dot with butter. Bake for 40 mins-1 hr until the top is golden and the sauce is just starting to bubble."]
'Baked apple & toffee crumble', ["100g raisin","100g pitted soft date , snipped into small pieces with scissors","85g light muscovado sugar","3 tbsp dark rum (or use orange juice)","25g unsalted butter","1 tsp mixed spice","zest and juice 1  lemon","4 Bramley apples , about 800g, peeled, cored and cut into 1cm rings","125g plain flour","100g unsalted butter","50g light muscovado sugar","3 tbsp jumbo oats","25g flaked almond (or use other nuts if you like)","custard or  ice cream , to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 190C/170C fan/gas 5. Put everything for the apple layer, except the lemon juice and apples, into a bowl and microwave on High for 1½ mins until the butter has melted and the sugar is syrupy. Toss in the apples and lemon juice, then spoon into a medium baking dish, making sure the dried fruit is evenly distributed.","STEP 2","Rub the flour and butter together, first into fine crumbs, then keep going until the mix forms bigger clumps, a bit like a rough biscuit dough. Stir in the sugar, oats and almonds. Scatter over the fruit, then cover with foil and bake for 1 hr, removing the foil for the final 30 mins, until golden and bubbling. Rest for 10 mins, then serve with custard or ice cream."]
'Rarebit toasties with sticky Marmite onions', ["2 tbsp plain flour","2 tbsp butter","250ml milk","50ml ale or stout","80g extra mature cheddar","1½ tsp English mustard","1 tsp Worcestershire sauce , plus extra to serve","pinch cayenne pepper","1 tbsp vegetable or rapeseed oil ,  plus extra for the eggs if using","2 onions , halved and thinly sliced","1 tbsp light brown soft sugar","1 tbsp Marmite","4 chunky slices sourdough bread","2 eggs (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Put the flour, butter, milk, beer, cheese and mustard into a pan, set over a medium heat and stir with a whisk until thickened and smooth. Add the Worcestershire sauce and cayenne. Cover the surface with a piece of baking parchment or cling film to prevent a skin forming and set aside to cool. You can make the rarebit sauce up to three days before using (store in the fridge).","STEP 2","Heat the oil in a frying pan. Cook the onions in the pan for 15-20 mins until caramelised. Add the sugar and Marmite to the onions and cook for another 2-3 mins until sticky, adding a splash of water if it looks dry.","STEP 3","Toast the slices of bread lightly and heat the grill. If you’re serving with an egg, heat a frying pan with a drizzle of oil. Spread 2 slices of toast with the onions and top with half the rarebit mixture. Cover the remaining 2 slices of bread with the rest of the rarebit mixture. Place under the grill until bubbling (about 2-3 mins), then sandwich the slices together with the cheesy onions in the middle. While they’re cooking, fry the eggs to your liking. Top the sandwiches with a few shakes of Worcestershire sauce, a grinding of pepper and the eggs."]
'Pear & hazelnut clafoutis', ["45g blanched hazelnuts , toasted","30g plain flour","4 medium eggs , plus 2 egg yolks","150g caster sugar","200ml milk","300ml double cream","2 tsp vanilla extract","2-3 perfectly ripe pears","25g blanched  hazelnuts","icing sugar , to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Put the hazelnuts in a food processor and whizz until finely ground. Add the flour, eggs, extra yolks, sugar, milk, cream and vanilla and whizz until you have a smooth batter.","STEP 2","Halve, core and slice the pears (you can peel them first if you like, but I usually don’t). Arrange the pear slices in a 26 x 33cm ceramic, cast iron or copper gratin dish, then pour in the batter. Bake for 30-35 mins, or until the batter is set in the centre, golden and slightly souffléd.","STEP 3","For the topping, toast the hazelnuts in a dry frying pan (keep a close eye on them – they can go from toasted to burnt very quickly), then roughly chop them so you’re left with a mixture of halved and more finely chopped nuts. Scatter over the clafoutis, then sieve a little icing sugar over the top. Leave to sit for 10-15 mins (the clafoutis will deflate a little). Serve warm with crème fraîche\xa0or pouring cream."]
'Three-cheese meatball lasagne', ["12 sausages","2 tbsp olive oil","2 onions , chopped","4 garlic cloves , crushed","2 tsp fennel seeds","2 tsp dried oregano or a small handful of fresh oregano leaves, chopped","½ tsp chilli flakes (optional)","1 tbsp sugar","500ml passata","400g can chopped tomatoes","100g butter","2 bay leaves","100g plain flour","1l milk","¼ fresh nutmeg , finely grated","100g baby spinach","handful basil , leaves torn","50g parmesan , grated","250g dried lasagne sheets (about 12 sheets)","50g cheddar , grated","150g ball mozzarella , torn into small pieces"], ["STEP 1","Squeeze the meat from the sausages and roll into meatballs – you’ll get about four balls from each sausage. Heat 1 tbsp oil in a wide, deep frying pan or casserole dish. Cook the meatballs in batches, making sure you don’t overcrowd the pan, until they’re all golden brown. Put them aside on a plate when they’re ready.","STEP 2","Heat the rest of the oil in the pan and add the onion. Cook for 8-10 mins until soft, then stir in the garlic, fennel, oregano and chilli, if using. Stir around for a min or 2, then add the sugar, passata and tomatoes. Swish a little water around the containers to wash out all the tomatoes and add to the pan. Season well and simmer, uncovered, for 30-40 mins over a gentle heat until the sauce thickens and the chopped tomatoes break down.","STEP 3","Heat the butter in a saucepan, add the bay leaves and let them sizzle in the butter for 1 min, then add the flour. Whisk to make a smooth paste, then add the milk, a little at a time, stirring continuously until it’s all incorporated and you have a thick white sauce. Add the nutmeg and some seasoning. Leave over a low heat for 5 mins to allow the bay to infuse, whisking every now and then.","STEP 4","Keep about 10 meatballs aside and add the rest to the tomato sauce. Spoon half the tomato sauce and meatballs into a baking dish (ours was 25cm x 35cm). Top with half the spinach, the basil and a little parmesan. Pour over about a third of the white sauce, and top with a layer of lasagne sheets, breaking them up to fit the dish if you need to.","STEP 5","Repeat the layers once more; meatballs and sauce, spinach, basil, parmesan, white sauce, pasta. Pour the remaining white sauce over the lasagne, spreading it to the corners to cover the pasta. Dot with the meatballs you set aside earlier and the mozzarella, then scatter over a generous helping of parmesan and cheddar. Heat oven to 190C/170C fan/gas 5. Or if not eating straight away, chill for up to 24 hrs or freeze for two months (defrost in the fridge overnight before cooking).","STEP 6","Bake the lasagne for 40-50 mins until bubbling and golden with lots of crusty cheesy bits around the edges. Leave to sit for 5-10 mins before serving."]
'Baked lemon & vanilla rice pudding', ["600ml milk","450ml single cream","zest 1 unwaxed lemon","1 vanilla pod , split","25g caster sugar","100g short-grain pudding rice","25g butter , diced"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 140C/120C fan/gas 1. Put the milk, cream, zest and vanilla pod in a saucepan. Gently bring to a simmer, then stir in the caster sugar and rice.","STEP 2","Transfer mixture to a shallow ovenproof dish and dot the butter on top. Bake for 30 mins, then stir well and cook for 1 hr more until the pudding is soft and creamy, and a golden skin has formed on top. The depth and type of dish you use will affect the cooking time, so if the pudding seems too loose, return to the oven and check every 10 mins or so. Once cooked, rest for 10 mins before serving."]
'Arroz al horno (baked rice)', ["2 tbsp extra virgin olive oil , plus extra to serve","800g thick pork belly pork slices (about 8-10 slices), halved","150g black pudding , roughly chopped","100g chunky bacon lardons","1 onion , finely chopped","2 red peppers , halved, deseeded and sliced","1 plum tomato , chopped","8 garlic cloves , roughly chopped","4 tsp smoked paprika","¼-½ tsp dried chilli flakes","½ x 400g can white beans , drained (you can use haricot, butter beans or cannellini)","1.2l chicken stock","6 thyme or rosemary sprigs","375g paella rice","1 lemon , juiced (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C/gas 6. Heat half the oil in a deep frying or sauté pan (or shallow casserole dish) measuring around 30cm in diameter. Over a high heat, colour the pork belly slices on each side in several batches, then transfer to a bowl. Add the remaining oil to the pan and lower the heat to medium, then add the black pudding and bacon and fry all over for several mins. Remove with a slotted spoon. Fry the onion and peppers for around 10 mins until soft and pale gold, then add the tomato and cook until soft. Add the garlic, smoked paprika and chilli flakes and cook for another 2 mins, then put the pork, black pudding and bacon back in the pan. Add the beans, stock and whichever herb you\'re using, and bring everything to the boil.","STEP 2","Sprinkle the rice around the pork belly, pushing it underneath the stock. Let the stock come to the\xa0boil again, season well, then transfer to the oven (leave it uncovered). Cook for 20 mins without stirring, then check to see how the rice is doing. The rice should be tender\xa0and the stock absorbed. If it’s not ready, put back in the oven for another 5 mins, then check again. Taste for seasoning.","STEP 3","Squeeze lemon juice over the top and drizzle over some\xa0extra virgin olive oil just before serving, if you like."]
'Sprout, comté & walnut tart', ["flour , for dusting","2 tbsp olive oil","knob of butter","1 leek , sliced","1 sharp green apple , diced","200g Brussels sprouts , shredded","1 tbsp lemon juice","200ml double cream","50g natural yogurt","100g comté (or vegetarian alternative), grated, plus extra to serve","3 eggs","freshly grated nutmeg","handful of walnuts","50g pumpkin seeds , blitzed to a crumb","150g spelt flour","1 tsp dried thyme","5g grated parmesan or vegetarian alternative","125g butter","1 egg yolk"], ["STEP 1","First off, make the pastry. Put the pumpkin seeds in the bowl of a food processor and pulse briefly to a crumb. Add the flour, thyme, parmesan (or vegetarian alternative) and ½ tsp salt and pulse again to combine. Add the butter and pulse to a breadcrumb consistency, then add the egg yolk and blitz again. Add iced water to the mix, 1 tbsp at a time, blitzing between additions until the dough clumps together (ours took 2 tbsp to reach this consistency). Tip the dough out into a bowl and bring together into a smooth ball with your hands, adding a little more flour if it’s sticky. Wrap in baking parchment and chill for 30 mins.","STEP 2","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Once rested, dust a work surface with flour and roll the pastry out to the thickness of a £1 coin. If it’s difficult to work with, you can do this between two pieces of baking parchment. Line a 23cm round tart tin with the pastry, prick the base, then fill with parchment and baking beans. Blind bake for 15 mins, then remove the beans and parchment and cook for a further 12 mins. Remove from the oven\xa0and reduce the temperature to 180C/160C fan/gas 4.","STEP 3","Heat the olive oil and butter over a medium-high heat. Gently fry the leek with a pinch of salt and a grinding of fresh black pepper for 6-8 mins until softened and aromatic. Add the apple and sprouts and fry for a further 5 mins until the sprouts are softened and the apple is colouring. Remove from the heat and squeeze over the lemon juice, tossing to coat.","STEP 4","Combine the double cream, yogurt, cheese, eggs and a good grating of nutmeg. Season and whisk until combined. Pour half the custard into the tart case\xa0and top with half the leek and sprout mix. Pour in the rest of the custard and top with the remaining sprout mixture. Dot the walnuts around the top of the tart.","STEP 5","Bake for 20-25 mins\xa0until puffed and golden, then remove from the oven and allow to settle for 10 mins before slicing. Scatter over a little of the grated comté (or vegetarian alternative) to serve."]
'Classic fish & chips', ["about 1 litre sunflower oil, for frying","2 thick skinless fillets of whiting, ling, pollock, haddock or cod (about 150g each)","2 large Maris Piper potatoes","1 tsp malt vinegar, plus extra to serve","75g self-raising flour, plus extra for dusting","25g cornflour","small pinch of ground turmeric","125g cold lager or fizzy water","4 cornichons","1 tsp capers","1 shallot","handful of parsley leaves, chopped","5 tbsp mayonnaise"], ["STEP 1","Cut the potatoes into chips and soak in cold water for 5 mins, then wash until the water runs clear. Tip into a pan of cold water with a pinch of salt and 1 tsp vinegar. Bring to a simmer, then turn down the heat and simmer gently for 10-12 mins until cooked through but not falling apart. Drain gently, then place on a tray in a single layer and chill until needed. Can be prepared a day ahead.","STEP 2","To make the tartare sauce, chop the cornichons, capers and shallot (finely chop if you prefer a smooth sauce), then combine with the parsley, mayo and a pinch of salt. Will keep chilled for up to 24 hours.","STEP 3","When you’re ready to fry, prepare the batter. Tip the flours and turmeric into a bowl with a pinch of salt, pour over the beer or fizzy water, and mix quickly until everything just comes together to the consistency of double cream – do not over-beat, a few lumps are fine. Keep chilled.","STEP 4","Pour the oil into a deep, wide pan like a wok, or heat a deep-fat fryer to 180C. If using a pan or wok, ensure that it is no more than two-thirds full with oil. Heat the oil until it is shimmering and carefully lower in the chips using a slotted spoon. Fry for 8-10 mins, gently stirring occasionally until golden and crisp. Transfer to kitchen paper to drain.","STEP 5","Put a little flour in a dish, then bring the oil you used to cook the chips up to 185C, if you have a thermometer, or until a drizzle of batter sizzles and crisps in less than a minute. Working quickly, dust the fish in flour, then dredge through the batter. Hold the fillet above the batter to let the excess drip back into the bowl, then carefully lower into the oil. Fry the fillets for a minute until the batter is just starting to set, then take a spoon and drizzle the fillets with extra batter to create an even crunchier, wispy coating. Fry the fish for about 4 mins, turning once, until deep golden and crisp. Lift onto some kitchen paper to drain for a minute, then serve with the chips, tartare sauce, and plenty of salt and vinegar."]
'Damson crumble', ["800g-900g damsons","50g light soft brown sugar","knob of butter","1-2 tbsp sloe gin (optional)","2 apples , peeled, cored and sliced","250g plain flour","150g unsalted butter , cold","80g light soft brown sugar","80g demerara sugar","50g ground almonds"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Put the damsons into a pan with the sugar, butter and sloe gin if using (or a splash of water if not) and heat gently until the damsons start to give off their juices. Tip into the base of a large shallow gratin dish (about 25cm long) and stir through the apple slices.","STEP 2","Put all the crumble ingredients into a food processor with a pinch of salt, and using the pulse button, whizz until the mixture just starts to clump together. Don’t whizz for too long or the mixture will stick together too much. Alternatively, rub the butter into the flour using your hands and then stir in the other ingredients.","STEP 3","Scatter the crumble over the damsons and bake in the oven for 30-40 mins until golden brown. Leave for about 15 mins before serving with custard or cream. Remember to warn everyone about the stones!"]
'Next level chocolate fondant', ["200g butter , melted","3 tbsp cocoa powder , for dusting","50g caramel sauce","200g dark chocolate , chopped","4 tbsp very strong coffee powder (espresso is ideal)","6 eggs , three whole, plus the yolks of 3 (freeze the leftover egg whites for another recipe)","75g golden caster sugar","50g plain flour","6 small metal pudding basins"], ["STEP 1","Use 50g of the butter to brush the insides of the pudding basins. Put them on a baking tray and transfer to the fridge to chill until the butter sets. Brush over another layer of the butter, then dust generously with the cocoa. Return to the fridge to set. Mix the caramel sauce with a good pinch of sea salt flakes, then chill in the fridge until ready to use.","STEP 2","Tip the remaining butter, the chocolate and coffee powder into a heatproof bowl. Set the bowl over a pan of gently simmering water, ensuring the bottom of the bowl doesn’t touch the water. Stir the mixture until smooth, adding another small pinch of sea salt. Tip the whole eggs, egg yolks and sugar into another bowl and beat together using an electric whisk until very pale – the whisk should leave a trail in the mixture when lifted. Sift in the flour, then gently fold in the melted chocolate mixture.","STEP 3","Spoon the fondant mixture into the prepared basins until just about halfway full, then transfer to the freezer on a baking tray for about 20-25 mins, or until the mixture\xa0is just set. Add 1 tsp of the salted caramel sauce to the middle of each fondant, then top up with the remaining fondant mixture. Return to the freezer until frozen. Can be prepared up to two weeks ahead.","STEP 4","Heat the oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Put the fondants on a baking tray and bake for 15 mins until the tops have formed a crust and they are starting to come away from the sides of the basins. Remove from the oven, then leave to rest for 1 min before turning out onto warm plates. Sprinkle with extra sea salt, then serve straightaway."]
'Flat apple & vanilla tart', ["375g pack puff pastry, preferably all-butter","5 large eating apples  - Cox\'s, russets or Elstar","juice of 1 lemon","25g butter, cut into small pieces","3 tsp vanilla sugar or 1 tsp vanilla extract","1 tbsp caster sugar","3 rounded tbsp apricot conserve"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 220C/fan 200C/gas 7. Roll out the pastry and trim to a round about 35cm across. Transfer to a baking sheet lined with parchment paper.","STEP 2","Peel, core and thinly slice the apples and toss in the lemon juice. Spread over the pastry to within 2cm of the edges. Curl up the edges slightly to stop the juices running off.","STEP 3","Dot the top with the butter and sprinkle with vanilla and caster sugar. Bake for 15-20 mins until the apples are tender and the pastry crisp.","STEP 4","Warm the conserve and brush over the apples and pastry edge. Serve hot with vanilla ice cream or crème fraîche."]
'Sausage & bean casserole', ["2 tbsp olive or  rapeseed oil","1 onion, finely chopped","2 medium sticks celery, finely chopped","1 yellow pepper, chopped","1 red pepper, chopped","6 cooking chorizo sausages (about 400g)","6 pork sausages (about 400g)","3 fat garlic cloves, chopped","1 ½ tsp sweet smoked paprika","½ tsp ground cumin","1 tbsp dried thyme","125ml white wine","2 x 400g cans cherry tomatoes or chopped tomatoes","2 sprigs fresh  thyme","1 chicken stock cube","1 x 400g can aduki beans, drained and rinsed","1 bunch chives, snipped (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat 2 tbsp olive or rapeseed oil in a large heavy-based pan.","STEP 2","Add 1 finely chopped onion and cook gently for 5 minutes.","STEP 3","Add 2 finely chopped medium celery sticks, 1 chopped yellow pepper and 1 chopped red pepper\xa0and cook for a further 5 mins.","STEP 4","Add 6 chorizo sausages and 6 pork sausages and fry for 5 minutes.","STEP 5","Stir in 3 chopped garlic cloves, 1 ½ tsp sweet smoked paprika, ½ tsp ground cumin and 1 tbsp dried thyme and continue cooking for 1 – 2 mins or until the aromas are released.","STEP 6","Pour in 125ml white wine and use a wooden spoon to remove any residue stuck to the pan.","STEP 7","Add two 400g cans of tomatoes, and 2 sprigs of fresh thyme and bring to a simmer. Crumble in the chicken stock cube and stir.","STEP 8","Cook for 40 minutes. Stir in a 400g drained and rinsed can of aduki beans and cook for a further five minutes.","STEP 9","Remove the thyme sprigs, season with black pepper and stir through some snipped chives, if using. Serve."]
'Mushroom rarebit with mash & thyme gravy', ["1kg floury potatoes , chopped into chunks","25g butter","100ml milk","4 large flat mushrooms , stems removed","olive oil , for brushing","25g butter","1 medium onion , chopped","1 tbsp plain flour","75ml Guinness or other stout","140g vegetarian mature cheddar , grated","1 tsp English mustard","2 eggs , beaten","2 tbsp extra-virgin rapeseed oil or olive oil","1 medium onion , chopped","2 tsp thyme leaves , plus extra to serve","2 tbsp plain flour","125ml white wine","300ml vegetable stock","½ tsp Marmite"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Put a large pan of water on to boil and salt it well. Boil the potatoes until tender, about 15-20 mins. Drain, return the potatoes to the pan and place over a low heat. Add the butter and milk, then mash until smooth. Remove from the heat and season with salt. Keep warm.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, brush the mushrooms generously all over with oil. Place gill-side up in a baking dish, bake for 15 mins, then remove from the oven. To make the rarebit topping, melt the butter in a saucepan over a medium heat and fry the onion for 10-15 mins until soft and translucent. Add the flour and cook for 1 min. Reduce the heat, then add the Guinness, cheese, mustard and seasoning, stirring until the cheese has melted. Add the eggs and stir constantly until the mixture thickens, about 5 mins, but don’t overcook or you’ll end up with scrambled eggs. Spoon the rarebit mix into the mushroom caps and set aside.","STEP 3","To make the gravy, heat the oil in a pan over a medium heat and add the onion and thyme. Fry for 10-15 mins until the onion is soft and translucent. Add the flour and cook, stirring, for 2 mins. Add the wine, stock and Marmite, then stir until thick. Simmer for about 5 mins.","STEP 4","Just before serving, heat the grill to high. Place the mushrooms under the grill and cook for a few mins until the rarebit is puffed and golden. Reheat the mash if you need to, place a spoonful on each plate along with a mushroom. Spoon gravy around and over the mash, scatter with thyme and serve."]
'Smoky spiced veggie rice', ["25g cashews","4 tbsp olive oil","1 corn cob","250g rainbow baby carrots , halved lengthways","2 red onions , finely chopped","2 celery sticks , finely chopped","2 large red peppers , finely sliced","3 garlic cloves , crushed","2 tbsp Cajun seasoning","1½ tbsp smoked paprika","1 tsp chipotle paste","2 tbsp tomato purée","200g heirloom cherry tomatoes , halved","400g can kidney beans , drained and rinsed","400g can cherry tomatoes","300g long-grain rice , washed","400ml vegetable or vegan stock","1 tbsp red wine vinegar (vegan varieties are readily available)","2 tbsp caster sugar","2 spring onions , finely sliced"], ["STEP 1","Dry-fry the cashews in a large saucepan or casserole dish over a medium heat until golden brown. Remove from the heat, leave to cool, then roughly chop. Heat 1 tbsp oil in the same pan over a high heat, then fry the corn on each side for 20 seconds to char. Remove from the pan, set aside, then tip in the carrots and fry for 5 mins. Remove from the pan and set aside.","STEP 2","Heat the rest of the oil in the same pan over a medium heat and fry the onions and celery for 10 mins until soft and slightly coloured. Tip in the peppers and garlic, then fry for another 5 mins before adding the Cajun seasoning, smoked paprika, chipotle paste and tomato purée. Fry for 1 min until the spices are fragrant, then add the cherry tomatoes and fry for another 2 mins.","STEP 3","Stir in the kidney beans, canned tomatoes, rice, stock, vinegar and sugar, then stir until everything is combined. Bring to the boil, then cover with a lid and simmer with a lid on for 35-40 mins on a medium-low heat, stirring halfway through, until the rice is cooked and liquid absorbed.","STEP 4","Slice the corn off the cob and mix it through the rice along with the carrots. Season and garnish with the spring onions and cashews."]
'Next level chilli con carne', ["2 dried ancho chillies","2 tsp black peppercorns","2 tbsp cumin seeds","2 tbsp coriander seeds","2 tsp smoked paprika","1 tbsp dried oregano","3 tbsp vegetable oil","1 ½kg braising steak, cut into 4cm cubes – meat from the brisket, short rib, blade or chuck steak are all good","2 onions, finely chopped","6 garlic cloves, minced","2 tbsp tomato purée","1 tbsp smooth peanut butter","½ tsp instant espresso powder","2 tbsp apple cider vinegar","1l beef or chicken stock","2 bay leaves","small piece of cinnamon stick","2 tbsp semolina, polenta or Mexican masa flour","25g dark chocolate (70-80% cocoa solids)","400g can kidney beans, drained but not rinsed (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 140C/120C fan/gas 1. Over a high heat,\xa0toast the whole chillies on all sides until you can smell them cooking, then remove and set aside. Keep the pan on the heat and toast the peppercorns, cumin seeds and coriander seeds until they just start to change colour, then grind to a powder using a pestle and mortar or spice grinder. Mix with the smoked paprika and oregano (this is a standard tex-mex seasoning), then set aside.","STEP 2","Return the casserole to the heat, add half the oil and heat until shimmering. Fry the beef in batches, adding more oil if you need to, until it’s browned on all sides, then set aside. Fry the onions in the pan over a low heat for about 8 mins until soft and golden, then add the garlic and cook for 1 min more. Working fast, add the meat and juices, the spice mix, tomato purée, peanut butter and coffee to the pan and cook for 2-3 mins, stirring to coat the meat until everything is thick and gloopy, then pour in the vinegar and stock.","STEP 3","Add the toasted chillies back into the casserole, along with the bay leaves, cinnamon and some salt. Bring to a simmer and stir well, then cover with the lid and cook in the oven for 3hrs, stirring occasionally, until the meat is very tender but not falling apart. Take the casserole out of the oven, put back on the stove and remove the lid. Simmer the sauce for 5 mins, then stir in the semolina flour and simmer for 2-3 mins more. Finely grate over the chocolate, stir through with the beans and simmer for a minute more to heat through. Fish out the chillies, then leave everything to rest for at least 15 mins.","STEP 4","Bring the pan to the table. Serve with bowls of accompaniments and the chilli paste (see tip below) to add heat."]
'Masala chicken pie', ["2 tbsp vegetable oil","4 skinless chicken breasts","2 onions , chopped","finger-length piece ginger , grated","3 garlic cloves , crushed","2 tbsp medium curry powder","2 tsp ground coriander","2 tsp ground cumin","2 tsp black or brown mustard seed","2 tsp white or  red wine vinegar","2 tsp sugar (white or brown)","2 x 400g cans chopped tomatoes","150ml light  coconut milk (buy a 400ml can- you\'ll need more for the topping)","1 large red pepper , deseeded and cut into large chunks","1 large green pepper , deseeded and cut into large chunks","½ a small bunch coriander , leaves roughly chopped, stalks reserved (see below)","1 ½kg floury potato , cut into very large chunks","150ml light  coconut milk","1 tsp turmeric","juice 1  lemon","1 bunch  spring onions , finely chopped","stalks from ½ a small bunch coriander , finely chopped","1 tsp kalonji seeds (also known as nigella or onion seeds )","naan bread , to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat a deep frying pan or flameproof casserole dish and add 2 tsp of the oil. Brown the chicken breasts quickly but well on both sides, then remove to a plate. Turn down the heat and add the remaining oil, the onions, ginger and garlic. Fry gently until soft. Add the spices and cook for a few mins, stirring.","STEP 2","Stir in the vinegar, sugar, tomatoes and coconut milk. Bring to a simmer and bubble for 10 mins. Roughly chop the chicken breasts and stir into the pan with any chicken juices and the peppers. Simmer for another 20 mins until the chicken is cooked through and the sauce reduced a little. Take off the heat, stir in the coriander leaves and season to taste – it will need a good seasoning.","STEP 3","To make the topping, put the potatoes in a big pan of water, bring to the boil, then boil until cooked – 10-15 mins depending on how big your chunks are. Drain really well, then tip back into the pan and steam-dry for a few mins.","STEP 4","Add the coconut milk and turmeric to the pan, and mash really well. Season with the lemon juice and some salt, then stir through the spring onions and coriander stalks.","STEP 5","Spoon the chicken masala into a baking dish. Dollop on spoonfuls of mash to cover, then sprinkle over the kalonji seeds. Can be covered and chilled for up to 2 days (or frozen for up to a month).","STEP 6","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6 and bake for 25-30 mins (or 45 mins from chilled) until hot through and crisping on top. Serve with naan bread, if you like."]
'Slow-baked clotted cream rice pudding', ["25g butter","100g short grain pudding rice","450ml full-fat milk","284ml pot double cream","227g tub clotted cream","1 split vanilla pod","85g golden caster sugar","freshly grated nutmeg"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/fan 160C/gas 4. Lightly butter a shallow ovenproof dish. Wash the rice well under cold water, then drain. Bring the milk and creams to the boil with the vanilla pod, add the rice and sugar, then stir well.","STEP 2","Tip the rice into the prepared dish, then grate a little nutmeg over the top. Dot with knobs of butter, bake for 15 mins, lower the oven to 160C/fan 140C/gas 3, then bake for 1 hr more, by which time the pudding should be golden brown on top and creamy underneath. Serve with spoonfuls of my Quick raspberry jam (below)."]
'Cooking with kids: Spaghetti & meatballs with hidden veg sauce', ["300g good quality  pork sausage (about 4 large or 8 chipolatas)","500g lean beef mince","1 small onion , coarsely grated","1 carrot , finely grated","1 tbsp dried oregano","50g parmesan , finely grated, plus extra to serve","1 medium egg","1 tbsp olive oil","1 tbsp olive oil","1 courgette , coarsely grated","3 garlic cloves , finely grated","1 tbsp tomato purée","pinch caster sugar","splash red wine vinegar","2x tins chopped tomato","cooked spaghetti"], ["STEP 1","Children: Squeeze all the sausage meat out of the sausage skins into a large bowl and add the mince. Tip all the rest of the meatball ingredients, except the olive oil, into the bowl and season with black pepper then squish everything together through your hands until completely mixed. Keep an eye on younger children to make sure they don’t taste any of the raw mix.","STEP 2","Children: Roll the meatball mix into walnut-sized balls and place them on a plate – this is a job children as young as 2 can help with and a great job to help teach older children basic division.","STEP 3","Grown ups: While the children are rolling the meatballs make the sauce. Heat the oil in a large saucepan. Add the courgette and garlic and cook for 5 mins until soft and mushy. Stir in the tomato puree, sugar and vinegar leave for 1 min then tip in the tomatoes and simmer for 5 mins. If your children like courgettes then you can leave the sauce chunky. But if, like mine, they hate courgettes then blitz the sauce with a hand blender – either way continue to simmer sauce gently while you cook the meatballs. If your child is confident with heat, from 7+ they can cook the sauce with supervision.","STEP 4","Grown ups: Heat the oil in a large frying pan and, working in batches, brown the meatballs on all sides then pop them into the sauce – continue to simmer the sauce for 15 mins, stirring very gently until the meatballs are cooked through. Serve with cooked spaghetti, extra grated Parmesan and a few torn basil leaves your child has picked and torn."]
'Chicken & leek filo pie', ["75g butter","2 leeks, halved lengthways and sliced","300g chestnut mushrooms, sliced","25g flour","300ml chicken stock","300g cooked chicken, shredded","75ml double cream","2 tbsp wholegrain mustard","small handful parsley","6 sheets of filo pastry","60ml olive oil","1 tsp thyme leaves","1 tsp nigella seeds","cabbage and mash, to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat a third of the butter in a large saucepan, cook the leeks for 10 mins or until softened, then tip onto a plate and repeat with another third of the butter and the mushrooms. Heat the remaining butter in the same saucepan and, once melted, stir in the flour and cook the sandy paste for 1 min, then stir in the chicken stock a ladleful at a time. Leave on a low heat to simmer for 5 mins, then stir the chicken, leek, mushrooms, cream and mustard into the sauce, add the parsley and season with salt and cracked black pepper. Spoon into a 20cm pie dish and leave to cool.","STEP 2","Heat oven to 190C/170C fan/gas 5. Lay a sheet of filo on a chopping board and brush with olive oil, then place on top of the pie with the corners resting on the sides of the dish, then repeat the process, placing the next sheet slightly off-centre – the idea is to fan the sheets of filo. Brush every layer with oil, and on the last layer sprinkle over salt, thyme leaves and nigella seeds. Press the pastry gently into the edge of the dish. Bake for about 1 hr until the pastry is deep golden, then remove from the oven and serve with buttered cabbage and mashed potato, if you like."]
'Pork noodle stir-fry', ["3 tbsp sesame oil","350g lean pork mince","350g egg noodles","thumb-sized piece ginger, peeled and chopped, or 1½ tbsp ginger purée","3 garlic cloves, crushed, or 1 tbsp garlic purée","320g stir-fry veg (we used 2 x 160g bags of mangetout, baby sweetcorn, beansprouts, carrots and peppers)","4 tbsp low-salt soy sauce","2 tsp cornflour","4 tbsp sweet chilli sauce"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a wok or frying pan. Add the mince, break it up with a spoon and fry over a high heat for about 8 mins until browning. While the meat cooks, boil a kettle, then pour the hot water over the noodles. Set aside for 5-10 mins to soften.","STEP 2","Add the ginger, garlic and veg to the pan and stir-fry for 2-3 mins. Mix 1 tbsp soy sauce with the cornflour to make a paste. Add the remaining soy sauce, the chilli sauce and 2 tbsp water. Drain the noodles and add to the pan with the sauce. Cook until the sauce coats the noodles, adding\xa0a splash of water if needed, then serve."]
'Slow cooker pork casserole', ["1 tbsp vegetable or rapeseed oil","4 pork shoulder steaks (about 750g), cut into large chunks","1 onion, chopped","1 leek, chopped","1 carrot, chopped","bundle of woody herbs (bouquet garni) – we used 2 bay leaves, 3 sage leaves and 4 thyme sprigs, plus a few thyme leaves to serve","1 chicken stock cube","2 tsp Dijon mustard","1 tbsp cider vinegar","2 tsp cornflour","1 tbsp honey"], ["STEP 1","Heat your slow cooker. Drizzle the oil in a wide frying pan over a high heat. Season the pork, then add to the hot pan. Avoid overcrowding the meat – you may want to do this in batches. Cook until deep brown all over, then transfer to the slow cooker. Add the onion and leeks to the frying pan and cook for a few mins, until they soften. Add a splash of water and scrape any tasty bits from the bottom, then tip everything into the slow cooker. Add the carrot, herbs, stock cube, mustard and vinegar, season, then add enough water to just cover the ingredients. Stir, then set your slow cooker on low for 6-8 hrs, or high for 5-6 hrs.","STEP 2","In a saucepan, mix the cornflour and honey with 1-2 tsp of liquid from the slow cooker, until you have a smooth paste. Add 100ml more liquid, bring to a simmer until thickened, then stir back into the casserole. Serve with mash or dumplings, scattered with thyme leaves."]
'Fish pie with saffron mash', ["3 shallots , finely chopped","3 tbsp white wine vinegar","150ml white wine","142ml pot  double cream","900g fresh  haddock  fillets, skinned","200g bag raw, peeled prawn , preferably unfrozen","800g fresh  spinach  (about 2 bags)","200g crabmeat","3 garlic cloves","1 red chilli , halved and deseeded","200ml full-fat milk","pinch saffron  strands","1 ¼kg potato , cut into large chunks","4 tbsp olive oil","zest and juice 1 lemon"], ["STEP 1","Tip the shallots and vinegar into a saucepan and place on the heat so the vinegar evaporates quickly. Splash in the white wine and reduce until practically dry. Add cream, bring to the boil, then simmer gently until reduced by two-thirds and very thick. Leave to cool. Cut the fish into bite-size chunks and set aside with the prawns.","STEP 2","Tip spinach into a large colander and pour over boiling water from a kettle until all the spinach is wilted (you may need to do this more than once). Cool under the cold tap, then squeeze the spinach tightly to get rid of any excess liquid.","STEP 3","To make the topping, mash the saffron, garlic and chilli together using a pestle and mortar. Tip into a saucepan with the milk, bring to the boil, then remove from the heat to infuse. Bring the potatoes to the boil and simmer for 15 mins until soft. Drain, then mash well with the infused milk, olive oil, lemon juice and zest.","STEP 4","Heat oven to 200C/fan 180C/gas 6. To assemble the pie, mix the fish and prawns into the cold cream until completely coated. Tip the fish into the bottom of a large gratin dish and scatter over clumps of crabmeat. Unravel the spinach and lay it over the fish, then top with the mash. Cook the pie for about 30 mins until golden and starting to brown and bubble around the edges. Serve with green veg if you like."]
'Brie, ham & fig jam toastie', ["a little butter , softened","2 thick slices good  white bread","1 tbsp fig jam","2 tsp Dijon mustard","few slices brie or camembert","1 thick slice of ham (best from the deli counter, or leftover)","salad leaves , to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat a toastie maker\xa0or a small griddle pan. Butter each slice of bread on one side, then spread the other side of one slice with fig jam, and one with mustard. Top the fig jam with brie and ham, sandwich with the remaining bread, butter-side up, then place in the toastie maker or the griddle pan. If cooking in a pan, squash down a little with the back of a fish slice while cooking, flip over after 2-3 mins when golden, then cook on the other side. Serve with a handful of salad leaves on the side, if you like."]
'Cheesy leek & bacon pasta', ["1 tbsp olive oil","300g leek, halved and finely sliced","8 rashers smoked streaky bacon, sliced","400g pasta shapes (we used penne)","100g herb & garlic soft cheese (we used Boursin)"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a large non-stick frying pan. Add the leeks and 2 tbsp water, and cook for about 10 mins until very soft. Add the bacon, turn up the heat and fry until cooked.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, cook the pasta following pack instructions. Drain and reserve a mug of the cooking water.","STEP 3","Spoon cheese into the leek and bacon mix, adding some of the reserved cooking water. Season and stir gently over a low heat until melted. Toss through the cooked pasta, adding a little more cooking water, if needed, to help the sauce coat the pasta."]
'Griddle scones with honey', ["200g self-raising flour","½ tsp ground  cardamom (about 10 pods, ground)","25g butter","25g light muscovado sugar","1 egg","about  milk","butter and a honeycomb or jar of honey, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Put the flour and cardamom in a bowl and rub in the butter. Add sugar. Beat the egg in a measuring jug, then pour in milk to make it up to 100ml/3½fl oz. Pour into the bowl gradually, stirring first with a knife then with your hands, to make a soft, not sticky, dough. Knead until smooth on a floured work surface.","STEP 2","Divide the dough into three and roll into circles the thickness of a £1 coin. Cut each into quarters. Heat a heavy-bottomed frying pan to medium hot. Cook the scones in batches for a couple of mins each side, until golden brown. Serve, spread with butter and drizzled with honey."]
'Ultimate toad-in-the-hole with caramelised onion gravy', ["140g plain flour","4 large eggs","300ml semi-skimmed milk","1 tbsp wholegrain mustard","handful of woody herbs, leaves picked and chopped (we used 6 sage leaves, 4 rosemary sprigs and 4 thyme sprigs), plus a handful, fried until crispy, to serve (optional)","2 tbsp sunflower oil","8 rashers smoked streaky bacon","8 fat sausages (we used Cumberland but use your favourite variety)","2 red onions, cut into wedges","cooked green vegetables (optional), to serve","mash (optional), to serve","drizzle of sunflower oil","2 red onions , halved and thinly sliced","1 tbsp golden caster sugar","2 tbsp balsamic vinegar","2 tbsp plain flour","250ml red wine","500ml chicken or beef stock"], ["STEP 1","Tip the flour into a large jug or bowl. Crack in the eggs, one at a time, whisking as you do. Pour in the milk and continue whisking until you have a smooth, lump-free batter. Add the mustard, herbs and some seasoning, then cover and set aside for 2 hrs, or chill overnight.","STEP 2","Heat oven to 220C/200C fan/gas 7. Heat the oil in a large metal roasting tin or enamel baking dish, roughly 30 x 22cm, with high-ish sides. Wrap a rasher of bacon around each sausage and pop them in the dish with the onion wedges. Place on the middle shelf of the oven (make sure the top shelf is removed to allow space for the batter to rise later). Cook for 15-20 mins until the sausages and bacon are browning and sizzling.","STEP 3","Meanwhile, make the gravy. Drizzle a little oil into a saucepan. Add the sliced onions and cook slowly for 15 mins. Stir every now and then until they are soft and caramelised. Add the sugar and balsamic vinegar, and cook for 5 mins more until sticky.","STEP 4","The batter should be the consistency of double cream - if it has become a little thick, add a splash of cold water. Take the batter to the oven, open the door, carefully pull out the shelf and quickly pour the batter around the sausages. Close the oven and do not open it again for at least 25 mins.","STEP 5","To finish the gravy, stir the flour into the onions to make a paste, cooking for 1-2 mins. Continue stirring while you splash in the wine, a little at a time, until you have a smooth, thick sauce. Increase the heat and bubble for a few mins until reduced by about half. Add the stock and some seasoning, and continue bubbling for 10 mins while the toad cooks.","STEP 6","By now the toad should be puffed up and deep golden brown. If not, continue cooking - but don\'t open the oven as it will sink. Serve scattered with the crisp herbs (if using), with the gravy, green veg, and mash, if you like."]
'Fig sponge pudding', ["250g butter , softened, plus extra for the dish","5 tbsp golden syrup","4 tbsp honey","8 fresh figs","4 large eggs","250g golden caster sugar","250g self-raising flour","1 tsp baking powder","1 tsp vanilla extract","4 tbsp full-fat Greek yogurt","2-3 thyme sprigs (optional)","extra virgin olive oil or honey, for drizzling (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Butter a 20 x 22cm ovenproof dish, then pour in the golden syrup and honey. Trim the stalks from the figs, then cut a deep cross in the top, just so they open out a bit, but be careful not to cut all the way through. Sit the figs upright on top of the syrup and put them in the oven to bake for 15-20 mins until softened and starting to caramelise a little at the edges.","STEP 2","While the figs are cooking, make the sponge mixture. Put the eggs, sugar, flour, baking powder, vanilla and butter in a bowl and use an electric whisk to beat until smooth.","STEP 3","Remove the dish from the oven, scoop the figs out with a slotted spoon and set aside. Once the syrup mixture has cooled in the dish, take spoonfuls of the sponge batter and gently place them on top of the syrup. It’s best to do this all the way around the edge first, then end in the middle – this helps keep the syrup mixture separate. Smooth the batter out very gently to cover any gaps and seal the syrup mixture in.","STEP 4","Bake for 35-40 mins or until the sponge springs back when pressed. Allow to cool for around 5 mins or until just warm, then seconds before serving, dot the surface with eight small dollops of the yogurt. Top each mound with a baked fig, then scatter over some thyme leaves and drizzle with extra virgin olive oil, if you like."]
'Caramel pear blondies', ["250g unsalted butter , cubed, plus extra for the tin","3 large eggs","275g light brown soft sugar","25g dark brown muscovado sugar","1 tsp vanilla bean paste","1 tsp fine sea salt","200g plain flour","1 tsp baking powder","100g dried pears , roughly chopped","100g dark chocolate , roughly chopped","3 tbsp caramel , from a can or jar"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Butter and line a 20 x 20cm square cake\xa0tin.","STEP 2","Melt the butter in a saucepan over a medium heat, swirling it around. Allow to bubble for a few minutes, or until it turns a light golden brown and smells biscuity. Remove from the heat and leave to cool a little.","STEP 3","Tip the eggs into a large mixing bowl and whisk together with the light and dark sugars until just combined. Whisk through the melted butter, vanilla and salt.","STEP 4","Gently fold through the flour, baking powder, dried pears and most of the chocolate chunks, being careful not to overmix (this will make the blondies dense).","STEP 5","Pour the mixture into the lined tin. Top with the remaining chocolate and dollops of the caramel. Put in the centre of the oven to bake for 40 mins, or until a skewer inserted comes out with sticky crumbs (it shouldn’t be wet). Leave to cool completely in the tin. It will sink a little – the centre should be slightly squidgy. Cut into 12 squares. Will keep in an airtight container for up to three days."]
'Cherry Bakewell sponge pudding', ["2 x 425g cans pitted black cherries , in syrup","6 tbsp cherry  jam","200g butter , softened","200g golden caster sugar","3 large eggs","50g self-raising flour","140g ground almond","1 tsp almond extract","50g flaked almond","icing sugar , for dusting","cream or custard , to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Tip the syrup from the cherries and the jam into a saucepan. Boil for 10-15 mins until the liquid has reduced by half and is thick and syrupy, and add the cherries to the pan. Pour into a baking dish, roughly 18 x 25cm, then set aside.","STEP 2","In a large bowl, mix the butter, sugar, eggs, flour, almonds, almond extract and a pinch of salt with an electric whisk until combined. Dollop the sponge mixture over the cherries and spread to a smooth layer, trying not to disturb the cherries underneath too much. Scatter over the flaked almonds, then bake for 45 mins until a skewer inserted into the sponge layer comes out clean. Leave to cool for 5 mins, then dust with icing sugar and serve with cream or, better yet, custard."]
'Chorizo bean burgers', ["100g mini cooking chorizo , skins removed","3 pork sausages , squeezed from their skins","¼ tsp smoked paprika","1 tbsp lime juice , plus wedges to serve","small bunch coriander , chopped","½ x 400g can mixed beans , drained and rinsed","1 medium egg , lightly whisked","1 ½ tbsp olive oil , plus extra to drizzle","2 ciabatta rolls, split and toasted","soured cream, avocado, small handful rocket and  chips , to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","In a food processor, pulse the chorizo, sausagemeat, paprika, lime juice and coriander until well combined. Add the beans and some seasoning, and quickly pulse again to mix. Tip into a bowl and mix in just enough egg (about half) to bind. Shape into 2 fat burgers, cover and chill for 15 mins. Meanwhile, heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6.","STEP 2","Heat the oil in a pan and fry the burgers for 3 mins on each side. Transfer to a baking sheet and cook in the oven for a further 10 mins until cooked through.","STEP 3","Serve the burgers in rolls with soured cream, avocado and rocket, with chips and lime wedges on the side, if you like."]
'Greek lamb & macaroni bake', ["1 tbsp olive oil","1 large onion, chopped","2 garlic cloves, crushed","500g lean lamb mince","1 tsp ground cinnamon","1 beef or lamb stock cube","2 x 400g cans chopped tomatoes","1 tbsp dried oregano","400g macaroni","250g tub ricotta","50g parmesan, grated","50ml milk","garlic bread, to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a large pan, add the onion and cook for 10 mins until soft. Add the garlic and cook for 1 min more, then tip in the lamb mince, turn up the heat and brown, breaking up the mince with a wooden spoon.","STEP 2","Once the lamb is browned, add the cinnamon, crumbled stock cube, tomatoes and oregano. Stir well and simmer for 15 mins, covered, then for 15 mins, uncovered, until the sauce has thickened and the tomatoes have cooked down.","STEP 3","Meanwhile, cook the macaroni following pack instructions. Drain well. Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6.","STEP 4","Mix together the ricotta, most of the parmesan and the milk with plenty of seasoning, and stir into the macaroni. Tip the mince into a large baking dish, top with the macaroni mixture, and scatter over the remaining parmesan. Bake for 30 mins until golden and bubbling. Serve hot with garlic bread, if you like."]
'Next level mac ‘n’ cheese', ["500g small elbow macaroni","80g butter , plus extra for tossing through the pasta","3 tbsp plain flour","600ml whole milk","170g can evaporated milk","700g extra mature cheddar , 500g coarsely grated, 200g chopped into small chunks","1 tbsp mustard powder","large pinch cayenne pepper","1 tbsp Marmite","splash of malt, cider or red wine vinegar","50g grated parmesan (or vegetarian alternative)","50g fresh white breadcrumbs","50g panko breadcrumbs"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 220C/200C fan/gas 8. Cook the macaroni in salted water for 2 mins less than the stated cooking time, so it still has plenty of bite. Drain well and toss with a small knob of the butter to stop it from sticking together.","STEP 2","In a heavy-bottomed saucepan, heat the remaining butter until frothy and nut-brown. Pour off 1 tbsp into a small bowl and place the pan back on the heat, then scatter over and whisk in the flour and cook for 3 mins until you have a sandy paste. Add the milk, a splash at a time, simmering and whisking until smooth between each addition. Once all the milk has been added, drizzle in the evaporated milk, then add the grated cheddar, a handful at a time, until you have a thick, cheesy sauce. Stir through the mustard powder, cayenne, Marmite and vinegar and taste for seasoning, adding salt and pepper as needed.","STEP 3","Remove from heat, stir in the macaroni, then stir through the chunks of cheese. Tip the contents of the saucepan into a large, buttered baking dish. In a small bowl, mix together all the breadcrumbs, the parmesan, another small pinch of cayenne and some crunchy sea salt if you want. Scatter the crumbs over the macaroni, drizzle with the reserved brown butter and bake for 30-35 mins until lightly browned, crunchy all over and bubbling around the edges. Leave to stand for 10 mins before serving straight from the dish."]
'A good steak & kidney pie', ["250g plain flour, plus extra for rolling","140g cold unsalted butter, roughly cubed","1 large egg yolk","1 small egg whisked with 1 tbsp milk, for the egg wash","1 ox kidney, about 400g/14oz, get it fresh from your butcher. Pig\'s and lamb\'s kidneys aren\'t suitable as they only need short cooking","1kg trimmed British top rump beef","250g flat mushrooms, unpeeled but wiped with a damp cloth","3 tbsp groundnut or vegetable oil","100g unsalted butter","1 large onion, peeled and thickly chopped","50-85g plain flour, depending on how thick you like your gravy","600ml off-the-boil water","1 tbsp Marigold Swiss vegetable bouillon powder","1 large bay leaf"], ["STEP 1","It\'s important to cook the meat a day ahead, so that you can discard any fat that has risen to the top, and so that the pastry doesn\'t slump in the face of a too-warm filling, so up to 48 hours ahead -make the pastry. Whizz the flour and a pinch of fine sea salt together for a few seconds in a food processor, then add the butter and whizz until the mixture looks like coarse breadcrumbs. Whisk together the egg yolk and 3 tbsp water and whizz with the pastry until it collects in a ball. Wrap in cling film and leave it to rest in the fridge for at least one hour.","STEP 2","Cut button-mushroom-sized lobes of kidney from the white central core (discarding). Cut the beef into bite-sized cubes and cut the mushrooms into chunks.","STEP 3","Heat 1 tbsp of the oil in a large, heavy frying pan over a medium-high heat. Throw in the kidney and fry until lightly coloured. Tip into a colander to drain.","STEP 4","Wipe out the frying pan and return it to a low-medium heat, adding 25g/1oz of the butter and 1 tbsp oil. Tip in the onion and fry for 10 minutes, stirring occasionally, until soft and slightly golden. Transfer to a large casserole, using a slotted spoon.","STEP 5","Preheat the oven to 160C/gas 3/fan 140C. Tip the 85g/3oz flour into a large plastic bag, and season it generously. Throw in the beef and shake until lightly floured.Return the frying pan to a mediumhigh heat, adding a little more oil and butter if needed. Shake off any excess flour (reserving it) then fry the beef in batches until golden-brown. As each batch is done, transfer it to the casserole.","STEP 6","Adding more oil and butter to the frying pan if necessary, fry the mushrooms for about 2 minutes until starting to wilt, then add them to the casserole with the drained kidneys, hot water, bouillon powder and bay leaf, plus the excess flour in the bag if you like a thick gravy. Stir well, cover and cook in the oven for 75-90 minutes until the meat is tender and the sauce is thick. Cool thoroughly, then put in the fridge (preferably overnight) so any fat will solidify – it can then be skimmed off and discarded.","STEP 7","In the morning - return the pastry to cool room temperature, then roll it out thinly on a wellfloured surface. Invert a 28-30x23cm, 6.5cm deep pie dish on to the pastry. Mentally add an extra 1cm all round, then use the dish as a guide to cut out the pastry lid. From the remnants, cut out enough 6cm-wide strips of pastry to go round the dish – they should cover the flat rim and about halfway down the insides.","STEP 8","Lightly butter the rim of the dish and line it with the strip(s) of pastry, sealing any joins with a little dab of water. Butter the shoulders of a pie raiser or an upturned egg cup and stand it in the middle. Spoon in the meat mixture to come level with the top of the dish. Don’t overfill: reserve any excess gravy to serve hot with the pie.","STEP 9","Brush the pastry rim with a little water, then drape the pastry lid over it, pinching the edges to seal. Cover with cling film and keep in the fridge if not baking immediately.","STEP 10","Finally, an hour before serving - preheat the oven to 200C/gas 6/fan 180C. Make four slashes in the lid of the pie, then brush with the egg wash. Bake for 35-45 minutes until the pastry is golden brown, turning the heat down 10-20° after about 20 minutes. Remove the pie from the oven and leave it to rest for around 10 minutes before cutting into it."]
'Guinea fowl tagine with chickpeas, squash & apricots', ["3 tbsp olive oil","2 guinea fowl , jointed like a chicken (ask your butcher to do this or see our video on how to joint a chicken, in \'Try\', below)","2 onions , roughly chopped","2 garlic cloves , chopped","1 butternut squash or small pumpkin, peeled, deseeded and cut into large chunks","1 tbsp ras-el-hanout","1 tsp ground cumin","1 tsp ground coriander","¼ tsp ground ginger","1 large  cinnamon stick","small squeeze of  clear honey","large pinch of  saffron , soaked in 1 tbsp boiling water","juice 1  lemon","850ml chicken stock","400g can chickpea , drained and rinsed","200g dried apricot","small bunch coriander","couscous or rice, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a large, shallow flameproof casserole dish. Season the guinea fowl pieces and brown them – in batches, if necessary – then remove to a plate.","STEP 2","Fry the onions in the same dish until softened, then add the garlic and squash, cooking for 1-2 mins. Tip in the spices and cook for a few mins before adding the honey, saffron and lemon juice. Pour in the chicken stock and the chickpeas.","STEP 3","Submerge the guinea fowl pieces in the stock and add the apricots. Cover the dish and simmer everything very gently for 50 mins-1 hr, until the fowl and squash are both tender. Stir through the coriander and serve with couscous or rice."]
'Vegetarian bean pot with herby breadcrumbs', ["1 slice crusty bread","½ small pack parsley leaves","½ lemon , zested","2 tbsp olive oil","pinch chilli flakes (optional)","2 leeks , rinsed and chopped into half-moons","2 carrots , thinly sliced","2 celery sticks , thinly sliced","1 fennel bulb , thinly sliced","2 large garlic cloves , chopped","1 tbsp tomato purée","few thyme sprigs","150ml white wine","400g can cannellini beans , drained"], ["STEP 1","Toast the bread, then tear into pieces and put in a food processor with the parsley, lemon zest, ½ tbsp olive oil, a good pinch of salt and pepper and the chilli flakes, if using. Blitz to breadcrumbs. Set aside.","STEP 2","Heat the remaining oil in a pan and add the leeks, carrots, celery and fennel\xa0along with a splash of water and a pinch of salt. Cook over a medium heat for 10 mins until soft, then add the garlic and tomato purée. Cook for 1 min more, then add the thyme and white wine. Leave to bubble for a minute, then add the beans. Fill the can halfway with water and pour into the pot.","STEP 3","Bring the cassoulet to the boil, then turn down the heat and leave to simmer for 15 mins before removing the thyme sprigs. Mash half the beans to thicken the stew. Season to taste, then divide between bowls and top with the herby breadcrumbs to serve."]
'Marmalade & whisky bread & butter pudding', ["8 slices day-old crusty white bread , crusts removed","50g very soft butter","4 tbsp Seville orange marmalade , plus 4 tsp","300ml full-fat milk","248ml pot double cream","3 large eggs","seeds 1 vanilla pod","4 tbsp golden caster sugar","1 tbsp whisky","icing sugar , for dusting"], ["STEP 1","Butter each piece of bread on both sides, then spread 4 with the 1 tbsp marmalade each. Pop the remaining bread on top to make 4 marmalade sandwiches. Cut into triangles and nestle in rows in a large baking dish. Heat oven to 160C/140C fan/gas 3.","STEP 2","Beat the milk, cream, eggs, vanilla, sugar and whisky together, then pour over the bread. Leave to soak for 30 mins.","STEP 3","Dot the remaining marmalade all over the top of the pud and dust with the icing sugar. Bake for 45 mins-1 hr or until puffy and starting to caramelise where the bread breaks out of the custard. Serve hot or warm."]
'Jerk prawn & coconut rice bowls', ["150g pack raw peeled king prawns","1 ½ tbsp jerk seasoning","400g can kidney beans in chilli sauce","250g ready-cooked pouch coconut rice"], ["STEP 1","Heat 1 tbsp flavourless oil in a large frying pan. Add the prawns and the jerk seasoning, and cook for 1-2 mins. Drain the beans, reserving 3 tbsp of the chilli sauce.","STEP 2","Add the beans to the pan along with the reserved sauce and the coconut rice. Fry for 3-4 mins, then season with salt to taste and spoon into two bowls to serve."]
'Red pepper linguine', ["1 roasted red pepper (from a jar or roast one yourself)","30ml olive oil","50g walnuts , toasted, plus extra to serve","1 small garlic clove","100g linguine or spaghetti","parmesan or vegetarian alternative, grated, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Blitz the roasted red pepper with the olive oil, walnuts and garlic in a food processor, season well and set aside.","STEP 2","Bring a pan of salted water to the boil, add the pasta and cook for 1 min less than the pack instructions and drain, reserving a ladleful of cooking water. Tip the pasta back into the pan, along with the reserved cooking water and red pepper sauce, and return to the heat to warm through. Tip the pasta into a bowl and top with the parmesan and some chopped toasted walnuts. Season and serve."]
'Slow-cooked lamb with onions & thyme', ["half a leg of lamb (about 1.25kg/2lb 12oz)","1kg onion (about 4 large ones)","handful of thyme sprigs","300ml red wine","large handful parsley"], ["STEP 1","Firstly, prepare the lamb. Heat oven to 160C/fan140C/gas 3. Wipe the meat all over and season well. Heat 3 tbsp of olive oil in a large heavy flameproof casserole, add the meat and fry all over on a fairly high heat for about 8 mins, turning until it is evenly well browned. Remove to a plate.","STEP 2","Thinly slice the onions. Add to the pan and fry for about 10 mins, until softened and tinged with brown. Add a few of the thyme sprigs and cook for a further minute or so. Season with salt and pepper.","STEP 3","Sit the lamb on top of the onions, then add the wine. Cover tightly. Bake for 3 hrs. You can make to this stage up to 2 days in advance, then reheat for 45 mins.","STEP 4","To finish off, strip the leaves from 2 thyme sprigs and chop them with the parsley. Scatter over before serving."]
'Caramelised banana & chocolate galette', ["70g hazelnuts , roughly chopped","150g dark chocolate , finely chopped","500g block shop-bought puff pastry","3 bananas , sliced","3 tbsp light brown soft sugar","vanilla ice cream , to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Blitz 50g of the hazelnuts in a small food processor until they resemble fine breadcrumbs, then tip into a bowl with the chocolate.","STEP 2","Roll the pastry out to a round roughly 30cm in diameter on a sheet of baking parchment. Scatter the chocolate and hazelnut mixture over the pastry circle, leaving a 5cm border. Top with the bananas and most of the remaining hazelnuts, then fold the edges of the pastry over. Transfer the galette to a baking sheet along with the baking parchment, then chill in the fridge\xa0for at least 10 mins.","STEP 3","Remove from the fridge and sprinkle the sugar over the galette, then bake for 25-30 mins, or until golden and puffed up. Scatter over the remaining hazelnuts and serve with a scoop of vanilla ice cream, if you like."]
'Sausages with quick onion gravy & sweet potato chips', ["2large orange  sweet potatoes about 800g/1¾lb total weight","3 tbsp vegetable oil","8 plump  sausages","365g jar onion  marmalade"], ["STEP 1","Preheat the oven to 200C/gas 6/fan 180C. Cut the sweet potatoes into wedges and put them in a large roasting tin. Drizzle over 2 tablespoons of the oil and toss the wedges to coat. Roast for 40-45 minutes until cooked through and crisp.","STEP 2","Halfway through the cooking time, heat the remaining oil in a frying pan. Add the sausages and cook for 20 minutes, turning regularly until cooked through.","STEP 3","Drain off any fat and add the onion marmalade, with about 100ml/31⁄2fl oz water. Stir well then heat through.","STEP 4","Sprinkle the chips with a little salt and serve with the sausages and gravy."]
'Smoked mackerel & leek hash with horseradish', ["250g new potatoes , halved","2 tbsp oil","2 large leeks , thinly sliced","4 eggs","100g peppered smoked mackerel , skin removed","2 tbsp creamed horseradish"], ["STEP 1","Put the potatoes in a microwaveable bowl with a splash of water, cover, then cook on high for 5 mins until tender (or steam or simmer them).","STEP 2","Meanwhile, heat the oil in a frying pan over a medium heat, add the leeks with a pinch of salt and cook for 10 mins, stirring so they don’t stick, until softened. Tip in the potatoes, turn up the heat and fry for a couple of mins to crisp them up a bit. Flake through the mackerel.","STEP 3","Make four indents in the leek mixture in the pan, crack an egg into each, season, then cover the pan and cook for 6-8 mins until the whites have set and the yolks are runny. Serve the horseradish on the side, with the pan in the middle of the table."]
'Squash & coconut curry', ["2 tbsp Madras curry paste","1 large butternut squash  (600g/1lb 5oz peeled weight), chopped into medium size chunks","1 red pepper , halved, deseeded and roughly chopped into chunks","400g can reduced-fat coconut milk","small bunch  coriander , roughly chopped"], ["STEP 1","Heat a large frying pan or wok, tip in the curry paste and fry for 1 min. Add the squash and red pepper, then toss well in the paste.","STEP 2","Pour in the coconut milk with 200ml water and bring to a simmer. Cook for 15-20 mins or until the butternut squash is very tender and the sauce has thickened. Season to taste, then serve scattered with chopped coriander and naan bread or rice."]
'Curried cauliflower & lentil soup', ["1 cauliflower","1½ tbsp oil","2 tsp fennel seeds","150g red lentils","3 tbsp curry paste of your choice","½  lemon , juiced"], ["STEP 1","Remove the outer leaves from the cauliflower, cut off the stalk and roughly chop, then cut the head into small florets. Toss a quarter of the florets in 1 tbsp oil and 1 tsp of the fennel seeds, season well, then tip into a roasting tin and set aside.","STEP 2","Heat oven to 220C/200C fan/gas 7. Heat ½ tbsp oil in a saucepan over a medium heat and add the remaining fennel seeds, toast for 2 mins, then add the lentils and the remaining cauliflower. Stir in the curry paste, then add 1 litre water and bring to the boil. Simmer for 25 mins until the cauliflower is tender and the lentils are cooked through.","STEP 3","Meanwhile, put the roasting tin of cauliflower in the oven and cook for 20 mins until crisp and slightly charred. Tip the soup mixture into a food processor and blitz until smooth, tip back into the pan to warm through, adding the lemon juice and a little water if it’s too thick. Tip into bowls and top with the crispy cauliflower and fennel seeds to serve."]
'Steak & caramelised onion sandwich', ["4 minute steaks  (Sainsbury\'s Taste the Difference are good) or 2 x 1cm thick sirloin steaks","1 tbsp  olive oil , plus extra for drizzling","1 small  ciabatta  loaf","4 tbsp caramelised onions","half an 85g bag  watercress"], ["STEP 1","Put the grill on. Heat a little oil in a frying pan. Season both sides of the steaks with salt, then fry for 1-2 minutes on each side. Meanwhile, slice the ciabatta in half lengthways and grill the cut sides until golden.","STEP 2","Drizzle the toasted ciabatta with olive oil, spread the bottom half with the onions and sit the steaks on top. Cover with the watercress and close the sandwich with the other half of the ciabatta. Cut into four sandwiches and serve two per person. Serve hot."]
'Sweet potatoes with mushrooms & rosemary', ["2 sweet potatoes , about 300g/10oz each","1 tbsp olive oil","200g chestnut mushroom , halved","1 tsp chopped fresh rosemary  or ½ tsp dried","2 tbsp freshly grated parmesan , (or vegetarian alternative)"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/fan 180C/gas 6. Prick the potatoes several times with a fork, then microwave on High for 8-10 mins, turning once, until tender. Meanwhile, heat the oil in a non-stick pan, add the mushrooms and rosemary and cook over a fairly high heat, stirring, until the mushrooms are tender and lightly coloured. Season to taste.","STEP 2","Put the potatoes in the oven and roast for 15 mins until the skins start to crisp. Split open and spoon over the mushrooms. Sprinkle with Parmesan to serve."]
'Citrus salmon salad', ["2 salmon fillets","1 large grapefruit","100g bag watercress","½ pack feta"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/ gas 6 and roast the salmon for 8 mins. Meanwhile, segment the grapefruit and mix the juices with 2 tbsp extra virgin olive oil to make a dressing.","STEP 2","Toss the watercress with the grapefruit segments, dressing and feta, and serve with the salmon, flaked into large pieces."]
'Warm chicken noodle salad', ["50g bundle of rice noodles  (we used Sharwood\'s Thai stir-fry noodles)","100g sugar snap peas , halved lengthways","1 small red pepper , seeded and thinly sliced","handful fresh basil","2 cooked chicken breasts","3 tbsp olive oil","finely grated zest and juice of ½ lemon","1 heaped tbsp mayonnaise"], ["STEP 1","Soak the noodles: Boil the kettle and tip the rice noodles into a heatproof bowl. Pour over boiling water to cover. Leave noodles to soak for 4 minutes.","STEP 2","Whisk and toss: Meanwhile, make the dressing. Whisk together the olive oil, lemon zest and juice and mayonnaise, then season if you want to. Drain the noodles and return to the bowl. Throw in the sugar snaps, red pepper and basil. Pour in half the dressing and gently toss.","STEP 3","To serve: Divide the noodles between two bowls. Slice the chicken breasts and arrange on top of the noodles. Drizzle over the remaining dressing and serve."]
'Butter bean & chorizo stew', ["200g cooking chorizo","2 x 400g cans chopped tomatoes","2 x 400g cans drained butter beans","1 tub fresh pesto"], ["STEP 1","Slice the chorizo and tip into a large saucepan over a medium heat. Fry gently for 5 mins or until starting to turn dark brown. Add the tomatoes and butter beans, bring to the boil, then simmer for 10 mins. Swirl through the pesto, season lightly and ladle into four bowls."]
'Sausages with pesto mash', ["3 large white potatoes","olive oil , for frying","4 pork sausages","200g cherry tomatoes on the vine","½ tub fresh pesto"], ["STEP 1","Peel and quarter the potatoes, then cook in a large pan of salted, boiling water for 15 mins. Drain and set aside.","STEP 2","Pour a glug of olive oil into a large frying pan over a medium heat and cook the sausages for 15 mins. Add the tomatoes to the pan for the final 5 mins. Mash the potatoes well and mix in the pesto. Season and serve with the sausages and tomatoes."]
'Moroccan lamb', ["500g lamb neck fillets, cut into bite-size pieces","2 tsp paprika","3 tsp ground cinnamon","2 x 400g/14oz cans chopped tomato with olive oil and garlic","1 tbsp finely chopped parsley, plus extra to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat a large, non-stick frying pan. Cook the lamb well on all sides without adding extra oil. Tip in the spices, then fry for 1 min more until aromatic.","STEP 2","Pour in the chopped tomatoes and parsley, bring to the boil, then simmer gently, with a lid on, for 30 mins or until the lamb is tender. Serve sprinkled with more parsley."]
'Sizzled sausage pasta', ["400g pasta  shapes","6 good-quality sausages","140g sun-dried tomatoes","4 tbsp oil  from the sun-dried tomato jar","a generous handful of fresh parsley , coarsely chopped"], ["STEP 1","Cook the pasta in boiling salted water according to the packet instructions or until tender.","STEP 2","Peel the skins off the sausages and chop the sausage meat into small hazelnut-sized pieces. Chop the sun-dried tomatoes into small chunks. Heat a tablespoon of the sun-dried tomato oil in a large frying pan (big enough to take the pasta later) and sizzle the sausage pieces for 8-10 minutes, stirring occasionally, until they’re crumbly and golden. Stir in the sun-dried tomato chunks and the remaining oil, and heat everything through.","STEP 3","When the pasta is ready, drain it well and toss into the sausage mixture with the parsley. Make sure everything is well mixed and coated with the oil. Season generously with salt and pepper, and serve straight from the pan."]
'Creamy pesto & kale pasta', ["1 tbsp rapeseed oil","2 red onions , thinly sliced","300g kale","300g wholemeal  pasta (penne or mafalda work well)","4 tbsp reduced-fat cream cheese","4 tbsp fresh pesto or vegetarian alternative"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a large pan over a medium heat. Fry the onions for 10 mins until softened and beginning to caramelise. Add the kale and 100ml water, then cover and cook for 5 mins more, or until the kale has wilted.","STEP 2","Cook the pasta following pack instructions. Drain, reserving a little of the cooking water. Toss the pasta with the onion mixture, cream\xa0cheese and pesto, adding a splash of the reserved cooking water to loosen, if needed. Season."]
'Smoked duck & grilled peach salad', ["3 tbsp extra virgin olive oil","1 tbsp sherry vinegar","4 peaches","100g watercress","50g smoked duck"], ["STEP 1","In a large bowl, mix together 3 tbsp extra virgin olive oil and 1 tbsp sherry vinegar with some seasoning.","STEP 2","Cut 4 peaches into quarters and griddle for 2-3 mins each side until charred and slightly caramelised. Toss 100g watercress with the dressing, then divide between bowls. Top with the peaches and 50g smoked duck."]
'Cheese & chilli melts', ["250g strong cheddar , grated","4 tomatoes , roughly chopped","1 green or red chilli , deseeded and finely chopped","½ large bunch coriander , leaves roughly chopped","8 flour tortillas (we used Discovery)","oil , for brushing"], ["STEP 1","Put the cheese, tomatoes, chilli and coriander leaves into a bowl with some seasoning, then mix well.","STEP 2","Warm tortillas in the microwave according to pack instructions – this makes them more bendable. Divide the cheese mix over one half of each tortilla. Fold over the other half to make 8 half-moons, then press down to seal.","STEP 3","Brush the tops with a little oil, then sit, oil-side down, on a hot area of the barbecue. Cook for a couple of mins until crisp and golden, brush the uncooked side with oil, then flip over for another few mins. Slice into wedges, then pile onto a platter while you cook the rest."]
'Summer traybake chicken', ["4 chicken breasts","1 tbsp olive oil","250g cherry tomatoes","4 tbsp pesto"], ["STEP 1","Put the chicken breasts in a large, shallow roasting tray and drizzle with olive oil. Grill for 10 mins, then add cherry tomatoes and grill for another 5 mins until chicken is cooked. Drizzle pesto over the top and serve."]
'Mustard-stuffed chicken', ["125g ball mozzarella, torn into small pieces","50g strong cheddar, grated","1 tbsp wholegrain mustard","4 skinless boneless chicken breast fillets","8 smoked streaky bacon rashers"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/fan 180C/gas 6. Mix the cheeses and mustard together. Cut a slit into the side of each chicken breast, then stuff with the mustard mixture. Wrap each stuffed chicken breast with 2 bacon rashers – not too tightly, but enough to hold the chicken together. Season, place on a baking sheet and roast for 20-25 mins."]
'Prawn & coconut soup', ["3 tbsp Thai green curry paste","400ml can coconut milk","150g cooked prawns","250g pack courgetti"], ["STEP 1","Heat 1 tsp flavourless oil in a frying pan over a medium heat. Add the curry paste and cook for 1 min. Pour in the coconut milk, then leave to bubble away for a few mins before adding the prawns and courgetti. Cook for 1 min more to warm through, then divide between bowls."]
'Pan-fried camembert sandwich', ["2 thick slices of white bread","wedge of camembert  or brie (about 85g/3oz)","a spoonful of cranberry  sauce","a few drops of balsamic vinegar","butter"], ["STEP 1","Butter the bread. Put a wedge of camembert or brie on the unbuttered side of one slice of bread. Top with a spoonful of cranberry sauce. Drizzle with a few drops of balsamic vinegar, if you have some.","STEP 2","Put the second slice of bread on top, buttered side out. Fry in a hot non-stick pan, pressing down with a fish slice, for a minute or two on each side, until golden brown and melting. Cut in half and eat straightaway."]
'Prawn & leek frittata', ["3 large leeks","150g pack raw peeled king prawns","5 large eggs","120g garlic & herb cream cheese"], ["STEP 1","Heat 2 tbsp olive oil in a medium frying pan. Slice the leeks and add to the pan, cooking for 5 mins. Add the prawns and cook for 1 min more. Beat the eggs and whisk through half the cream cheese. Season to taste. Pour the mixture over the prawns and leeks, dot over the remaining cheese and cook on a medium heat for 5-8 mins. Finish under a medium-hot grill for 2 mins until just set with a slight wobble."]
'Beetroot, hummus & crispy chickpea sub sandwich', ["300g pack  cooked beetroot in water, drained, half sliced","400g can chickpeas , drained","3 tbsp vegan pesto","olive oil","splash of vinegar (white wine vinegar if you have it)","2 large ciabatta rolls, sliced in half","2 large handfuls mixed rocket, watercress & spinach  salad"], ["STEP 1","Blitz the whole beetroot, ¾ of the chickpeas, 2 tbsp pesto and 1 tbsp oil in a food processor with some seasoning until you have a thick, smooth hummus. Heat the ciabatta following the pack instructions.","STEP 2","Fry the remaining chickpeas in a little oil until crisp, then set aside. Toss the salad leaves with the remaining pesto and a splash of vinegar. Slice the rolls, then assemble the sandwiches with the hummus, beetroot slices, salad leaves and fried chickpeas."]
'Creamy tomato courgetti', ["4 slices of Parma ham","½ small pack basil","350g tomato and mascarpone sauce","250g pack courgetti"], ["STEP 1","Roughly tear the ham and basil. Heat a frying pan over a medium heat and dry-fry the ham until crisp. Transfer to a plate with a slotted spoon. Add the sauce to the pan and cook for 1-2 mins, then toss in the courgetti. Cook for 1 min more until warmed through. Divide between bowls, then top with the ham and basil."]
'Blackened salmon fajitas', ["4 salmon fillets","sunflower oil , or any oil suitable for frying","1 fajita kit","2 avocados","2 limes"], ["STEP 1","Coat the salmon in 1 tbsp oil and the fajita spice mix. Add 1 tbsp oil to a frying pan and fry for 8 mins until blackened.","STEP 2","Mash the avocados with a fork, season and squeeze over the juice of 1 lime. Serve the salmon in large flakes with the tortillas, avocado, salsa and the other lime, cut into wedges."]
'White fish with sesame noodles', ["150g soba or wholemeal noodles (300g if using pre-cooked)","25g toasted sesame seeds , plus extra to serve","2 tbsp soy sauce","1 tbsp oil","1 tsp rice vinegar (or any white vinegar)","200g spinach leaves","2 seabass fillets"], ["STEP 1","Use a spice grinder or pestle and mortar to crush the sesame seeds, then stir in the soy sauce, oil, 1 tbsp of water and a splash of rice vinegar, to make a creamy dressing, season and set aside.","STEP 2","Bring a pan of salted water to the boil, add the noodles and cook following pack instructions, then drain and set aside. Using the same pan, tip in all the spinach and cook until reduced down and dark green. Tip in the noodles, along with the sesame dressing and a splash of water and toss well to heat through.","STEP 3","Heat the oil in a non-stick frying pan over a medium to high heat. Season the skin of the seabass, then place in the pan skin-side down, fry until the skin has crisped up and the flesh has nearly all turned opaque, around 3 mins. Flip over and fry for 30 seconds further, until the fish is flaking and cooked through. Divide the noodles and greens between two bowls and place the fish on top. Scatter over the toasted sesame seeds and serve."]
'Cheesy leeks & ham', ["8 small  leeks , white part only","8 slices cooked ham","100g cheddar , grated","2 tbsp Dijon mustard","6 tbsp crème fraîche  (full or half-fat)"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/fan180C/gas 6. Cook the leeks in a pan of boiling salted water for 4-5 mins or until just tender. Drain and cool under a cold tap to stop them from cooking any further, then drain again well and pat dry on kitchen paper.","STEP 2","Wrap each leek in a slice of ham, then arrange, side-by-side, in a large baking dish. Mix the cheddar in a bowl with the Dijon mustard and crème fraîche, until well combined. Season to taste. Spread over the leeks, then bake for 15-20 mins until bubbling and golden brown. Serve at once with plenty of crusty bread to mop up the juices."]
'Ultimate chorizo ciabatta', ["2 small or 1 large ciabatta","150g pack cooking chorizo , halved lengthways","75g pesto","200g roasted red peppers from a jar","handful rocket"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4 and put the ciabatta in to warm up. Put a griddle pan over a medium heat and cook the chorizo for 5 mins each side or until charred and cooked through.","STEP 2","Open up the warmed ciabatta and spread the pesto on the bottom. Layer with the red peppers , then the warm chorizo. Scatter over the rocket, sandwich the ciabatta together, cut in two and serve."]
'Easy risotto with bacon & peas', ["1 onion","2 tbsp olive oil","knob of butter","6 rashers streaky bacon, chopped","300g risotto rice","1l hot vegetable stock","100g frozen peas","freshly grated parmesan, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Finely chop 1\xa0onion. Heat 2 tbsp olive oil and a knob of butter in a pan, add the onions and fry until lightly browned (about 7 minutes).","STEP 2","Add 6 chopped rashers streaky\xa0bacon and fry for a further 5 minutes, until it starts to crisp.","STEP 3","Add 300g risotto\xa0rice and 1l hot vegetable stock, and bring to the boil. Stir well, then reduce the heat and cook, covered, for 15-20 minutes until the rice is almost tender.","STEP 4","Stir in 100g frozen\xa0peas, add a little salt and pepper and cook for a further 3 minutes, until the peas are cooked.","STEP 5","Serve sprinkled with freshly grated parmesan and freshly ground black pepper."]
'Peanut butter & jam flapjacks', ["5 tbsp salted butter , plus extra for the tin","250g crunchy peanut butter","8 tbsp strawberry or raspberry jam","80g light brown soft  sugar","200g rolled oats"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Butter and line the base and sides of a 20cm square cake tin with baking parchment.","STEP 2","Put 3 tbsp each of the peanut butter and jam in separate small bowls and set aside. Tip the remaining peanut butter, the rest of the jam and the butter and sugar into a pan set over a medium heat and stir until everything has melted together. Quickly stir in the oats, then leave to cool for 5 mins.","STEP 3","Spoon the mixture into the prepared cake tin and gently press down with your hands. Dot over the reserved peanut butter and jam, then bake for 20-25 mins or until golden brown. Leave to cool completely in the tin, then turn out onto a board and cut into squares."]
'Gnocchi cacio e pepe', ["300g gnocchi","2 tbsp unsalted butter","60g parmesan or vegetarian alternative, finely grated","2 tsp black pepper","salad leaves , to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Cook the gnocchi in a large pan of lightly salted, boiling water. Drain and reserve 200ml of the\xa0cooking water.","STEP 2","Heat the butter in a large frying pan. Add the gnocchi, cheese and pepper as well as 150ml of the cooking water, raise the heat a little and stir vigorously until melted and the gnocchi is well coated. Pour in more of the reserved water if you like it saucier. Season with a little salt. Transfer the gnocchi to bowls and serve with a mixed salad, if you like."]
'Rosemary & garlic chicken', ["8 chicken thighs , skin on","1 tbsp seasoned flour","1 head garlic","3 large stalks rosemary","300ml dry white wine"], ["STEP 1","Prepare the chicken: Wipe the chicken with kitchen paper, trim away any excess skin with scissors then toss the thighs in the seasoned flour. Separate the bulb of garlic into cloves (no need to peel).","STEP 2","Fry the chicken: Heat 2 tbsp of olive oil in a large pan until searingly hot, add the chicken, skin side down, and fry without moving the chicken until the skin is crisp and browned. Turn the chicken over and brown it on all sides (you may need to do this in batches). Add the garlic and rosemary, then pour in the wine and season with salt and pepper. Bring to the boil, then reduce the heat and simmer, covered, for 40-45 minutes, until the chicken is tender and the sauce thickened. Serve with rice or parsley-tossed tagliatelle, and buttered spinach."]
'Garlic chicken parcels', ["2 chicken breasts","320g sheet all butter puff pastry","150g Boursin or garlic & herb cream cheese","½ lemon , zested and cut into wedges to serve","1 tbsp olive oil , plus extra for brushing","200g mixed pack green beans and broccoli"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 220C/200C Fan/gas 7. Cut a slit halfway in each chicken breast, then put each one between two pieces of baking parchment and bash with a rolling pin to flatten\xa0slightly.","STEP 2","Cut your sheet of pastry in half widthways and put both halves on a baking tray. Sit a chicken breast on top of each half, then cram the cavities with the Boursin (don’t worry if a bit of cheese oozes out). Season, scatter over the lemon zest then fold the edges of the pastry in to the centre and pinch shut. Flip each parcel over so the seal is on the bottom. Brush with a little oil, then bake for 30 mins until deep golden.","STEP 3","About 10 mins before your parcels are ready, steam or boil the greens until tender. Toss in the oil and season. Serve alongside your chicken parcels with lemon wedges for squeezing over."]
'Smoked salmon & spinach gratin', ["1.2kg spinach","15g butter","6 lightly smoked raw salmon fillets, skin removed (about 140g each)","300ml double cream"], ["STEP 1","Put the spinach in a really big saucepan (or two saucepans) and add a few tablespoons of water. Cover, set over a medium heat and cook for about 5-8 mins, turning the spinach over every so often, until wilted. Tip it into a colander to drain and allow it to cool (spread it out on a plate to cool it quicker). Take big handfuls of it in your fists and squeeze out the excess water. It’s really important that you do this, otherwise the water will leach out and make the cream watery and green.","STEP 2","Chop the spinach. Melt the butter in a saucepan and gently toss the spinach in it. Season with pepper and a tiny bit of salt (there’s so much salt in the salmon). Heat the oven to 160C/140C fan/gas 3. Lay the spinach in the bottom of a gratin dish (about 30cm x 20cm), then arrange the salmon fillets on top.","STEP 3","Heat the double cream in a small pan, then pour it all over the salmon and spinach. Bake for 35 mins, or until the top is golden and the cream is bubbling."]
'Asparagus cream pasta', ["1  bunch asparagus","142ml tub double cream","2 garlic cloves , peeled, but left whole","50g parmesan , half grated, half shaved","250g tagliatelle"], ["STEP 1","To prepare the asparagus, cut off and discard the woody ends, then neatly cut the tips away from the stalks. Keep the tips and stalks separate. In a small saucepan bring the cream and garlic to the boil. Take off the heat, remove the garlic, then set the pan aside.","STEP 2","Cook the stalks in boiling salted water for about 4-5 mins until tender, drain, then tip into the cream with the grated parmesan. Blitz with a hand blender until smooth.","STEP 3","Cook the pasta according to pack instructions, then throw in the tips 2 mins before the end of cooking time. Gently reheat the cream, drain pasta, then tip into a bowl with the cream. Toss, divide into pasta bowls, top with parmesan shavings and serve."]
'Saucy bean baked eggs', ["2 x 400g cans  cherry tomatoes","400g can mixed bean salad , drained","200g baby spinach","4 medium eggs","50g thinly sliced smoked ham , torn","wholemeal rye bread , to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Tip the tomatoes and bean salad into an ovenproof frying pan or shallow flameproof casserole dish. Simmer for 10 mins, or until reduced. Stir in the spinach and cook for 5 mins more until wilted.","STEP 2","Heat the grill to medium. Make four indentations in the mixture using the back of a spoon, then crack one egg in each. Nestle the ham in the mixture, then grill for 4-5 mins, or until the whites are set and the yolks runny. Serve with rye bread, if you like."]
'Salmon & spinach pasta', ["200g penne","2 skinless salmon fillets","60g sundried tomatoes","80g bag spinach"], ["STEP 1","Cook the pasta following pack instructions. Fry the salmon for 4-6 mins with the tomatoes in their oil. Flake the fish in the pan, then add the drained pasta and the spinach. Stir for 1-2 mins until the spinach is wilted and everything is coated."]
'Mary Cadogan’s salmon with a cheesy crunch crust', ["x salmon fillets","50g softened butter","4 tbsp slivered or flaked almond","4 tbsp chopped fresh parsley","50g gruyère  or emmental, coarsely grated"], ["STEP 1","Preheat the oven to 190C/fan 170C/gas 5. Season the salmon steaks all over. Liberally butter a shallow ovenproof dish big enough to take the fish in one layer. Smear the salmon with the remaining butter.","STEP 2","Mix the almonds, parsley and the gruyère or emmental, then press on to the top of the steaks.","STEP 3","Bake for 15-20 minutes, until the topping is crisp and golden and the salmon cooked. Serve with potatoes and a green salad or broccoli."]
'Chorizo & pea risotto', ["1 tbsp oil","200g chorizo, peeled and chopped","300g arborio risotto rice","2 tbsp vinegar (white wine vinegar if you have it)","1.2l chicken stock (fresh is best), heated until simmering","200g frozen peas","60g parmesan, finely grated, plus extra to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a large frying pan, tip in the chorizo and fry until it is crisp and all the oil has been released. Remove a quarter of the chorizo with a slotted spoon and set aside.","STEP 2","Tip the rice into the pan, stir to coat it in the oil and toast for a min or so, then pour in the vinegar. Once the vinegar has evaporated, add a ladleful of the stock, stir then, once absorbed, add a bit more. Continue doing this for about 20 mins until most of the stock has been absorbed and the rice has swollen but still has a slight bite.","STEP 3","Tip in the peas, parmesan and the remaining stock. Give everything a good stir. Once the cheese has melted, season with black pepper, then divide between bowls, topping each portion with the remaining crisp chorizo and extra grated parmesan."]
'Cheesy mushroom omelette', ["1 tbsp olive oil","handful button or chestnut mushrooms, sliced","25g vegetarian cheddar, grated","small handful parsley leaves, roughly chopped","2 eggs, beaten"], ["STEP 1","Heat the olive oil in a small non-stick frying pan. Tip in the mushrooms and fry over a high heat, stirring occasionally for 2-3 mins until golden. Lift out of the pan into a bowl and mix with the cheese and parsley.","STEP 2","Place the pan back on the heat and swirl the eggs into it. Cook for 1 min or until set to your liking, swirling with a fork now and again.","STEP 3","Spoon the mushroom mix over one half of the omelette. Using a spatula or palette knife, flip the omelette over to cover the mushrooms. Cook for a few moments more, lift onto a plate and serve with oven chips and salad."]
'Plaice in a hot vinaigrette', ["4 large plaice  fillets, about 140g/5oz each","3 tbsp olive oil","2 garlic cloves , thinly sliced","2 leeks , washed, trimmed and shredded into very thin strips","1 lemon , plus wedges to serve"], ["STEP 1","Get grilling: Preheat the grill to High. Lay the plaice fillets, skin-side down, on an oiled baking sheet, season with salt and freshly ground black pepper and drizzle with 1 tbsp of the oil. Grill the fish for 2-3 minutes (no need to turn).","STEP 2","Make the vinaigrette: While the plaice is grilling, heat the remaining oil in a small frying pan. Add the garlic and leeks and fry over a gentle heat until soft and golden. Squeeze in the juice from the lemon, then take the pan off the heat. Remove the fish from under the grill and arrange on plates. Using a slotted spoon, top the fish with the garlic and leeks. Heat the vinaigrette for a further minute until piping hot, then pour it over the fish and finish with a good grinding of black pepper. Serve with lemon wedges and boiled new potatoes."]
'Miso mushroom & tofu noodle soup', ["1 tbsp rapeseed oil","70g mixed mushrooms , sliced","50g smoked tofu , cut into small cubes","½ tbsp  brown rice miso paste","50g dried buckwheat or egg noodles","2 spring onions , shredded"], ["STEP 1","Heat half the oil in a frying pan over a medium heat. Add the mushrooms and fry for 5-6 mins, or until golden. Transfer to a bowl using a slotted spoon and set aside. Add the remaining oil to the pan and fry the tofu for 3-4 mins, or until evenly golden.","STEP 2","Mix the miso paste with 325ml boiling water in a jug. Cook the noodles following pack instructions, then drain and transfer to a bowl. Top with the mushrooms and tofu, then pour over the miso broth. Scatter over the spring onions just before serving."]
'Muddled potato & mozzarella tortilla', ["2 tbsp olive oil","2 x 400g packs ready-roasted potatoes  (available with different flavourings from most supermarkets)","8 eggs , beaten","4 vine-ripened tomatoes , sliced","150g ball mozzarella , torn into pieces"], ["STEP 1","Start by frying: Heat the oil in a large frying pan. Empty the potatoes into the pan, spread them out to cover the base, then fry for 5 minutes. Pour in the beaten eggs so they completely cover the potatoes, season well and leave the tortilla to cook on a medium heat for about 15-20 minutes, or until the base and edges have set.","STEP 2","Grill to finish: Take the tortilla off the hob and place under a hot grill until the top is firm, then remove from the grill and scatter over the tomatoes and mozzarella. Put the tortilla back under the grill for a further 3-5 minutes, or until the tomatoes are soft and the cheese has melted. To serve, cut into thick wedges."]
'Pesto & goat’s cheese risotto', ["olive oil , for frying","200g risotto rice","700ml chicken stock or vegetable stock","1 tub fresh pesto","100g soft goat\'s cheese"], ["STEP 1","Pour a glug of olive oil into a large saucepan. Tip in the rice and fry for 1 min. Add half the stock and cook until absorbed. Add the remaining stock, a ladle at a time, and cook until the rice is al dente, stirring continually, for 20-25 mins.","STEP 2","Stir through the pesto and half the goat’s cheese. Serve topped with the remaining cheese."]
'Crispy Greek-style pie', ["200g bag spinach leaves","175g jar sundried tomato in oil","100g feta cheese, crumbled","2 eggs","125g filo pastry"], ["STEP 1","Put the spinach into a large pan. Pour over a couple tbsp water, then cook until just wilted. Tip into a sieve, leave to cool a little, then squeeze out any excess water and roughly chop. Roughly chop the tomatoes and put into a bowl along with the spinach, feta and eggs. Mix well.","STEP 2","Carefully unroll the filo pastry. Cover with some damp sheets of kitchen paper to stop it drying out. Take a sheet of pastry and brush liberally with some of the sundried tomato oil. Drape oil-side down in a 22cm loosebottomed cake tin so that some of the pastry hangs over the side. Brush oil on another piece of pastry and place in the tin, just a little further round. Keep placing the pastry pieces in the tin until you have roughly three layers, then spoon over the filling. Pull the sides into the middle, scrunch up and make sure the filling is covered. Brush with a little more oil.","STEP 3","Heat oven to 180C/fan 160C/gas 4. Cook the pie for 30 mins until the pastry is crisp and golden brown. Remove from the cake tin, slice into wedges and serve with salad."]
'Ajo blanco', ["200g blanched almonds","50ml extra virgin olive oil","1 garlic clove (if you like garlic, try with 1 1/2 cloves, but children may find it too strong)","1 ½ tbsp red wine vinegar"], ["STEP 1","Blend the ingredients together with 350ml water and 1\xa0tsp salt.","STEP 2","Let the soup cool in the fridge for 1 hr or so, then serve with a drizzle of oil and some black pepper."]
'Smoked salmon & pea frittata', ["500g new potatoes","200g pack smoked salmon","8 large eggs","2 tbsp chopped dill","100g frozen petits pois"], ["STEP 1","Thickly slice the potatoes and cook in a pan of boiling salted water until just tender, about 10 minutes. Drain well and leave to cool slightly.","STEP 2","Cut the salmon into wide strips. Crack the eggs into a bowl, beat with a fork until lightly foamy, then stir in the smoked salmon, dill, peas and plenty of salt and pepper. Finally, stir in the potatoes.","STEP 3","Heat 3 tablespoons of olive oil in a large non-stick frying pan, carefully pour in the egg mixture and cook over a fairly low heat for 10-15 minutes, until the egg is starting to set just under the surface.","STEP 4","Put a plate that is slightly larger than the top of the pan on top and invert the frittata onto it. Slide it back into the pan and cook for a further 5 minutes to brown the underside. Slide on to a plate and leave to cool for 5 minutes before cutting into wedges. A tomato and chive salad tastes very fresh with this."]
'Vegetarian chilli', ["400g pack oven-roasted vegetables","1 can kidney beans in chilli sauce","1 can chopped tomatoes","1 ready-to-eat mixed grain pouch"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/ gas 6. Cook the vegetables in a casserole dish for 15 mins. Tip in the beans and tomatoes, season, and cook for another 10-15 mins until piping hot. Heat the pouch in the microwave on High for 1 min and serve with the chilli."]
'Cheesy fish grills', ["4 chunky skinless white fish  fillets, such as hoki or cod, about 500g/1lb 2oz total weight","oil , for brushing","4 thin slices of ham","50g grated mature cheddar","2 spring onions , sliced at an angle"], ["STEP 1","Preheat the grill to high and lightly oil a large shallow heatproof dish. Arrange the fillets in the dish, slightly spaced apart, and brush them with a little oil. Grill for 2 minutes.","STEP 2","Remove the dish from the grill, turn the fish over and top each fillet with a scrunched slice of ham. Mix together the cheese and onions, scatter over the fish and season with salt and pepper. Return to the grill for 5 minutes until the fish flakes easily when prodded with a knife. Serve with green vegetables – broccoli or stir-fried cabbage would be good."]
'Steak & chips salad', ["750g bag  frozen potato wedges","1 tbsp olive oil","2 pieces sirloin steak , about 350g/12oz in total","120g bag  herb salad","6 tbsp honey and mustard  salad dressing , bought or homemade"], ["STEP 1","Cook the potatoes: Scatter the frozen wedges in a single layer on a large baking sheet and bake until golden and crunchy, according to packet instructions.","STEP 2","Cook the steaks: While the potatoes are in the oven, heat the oil in a frying pan until hot, and fry the steaks for 2-3 minutes on each side. Remove the steaks from the pan and leave to rest for a few minutes before slicing into thin strips.","STEP 3","Assemble the dish: When the potatoes are done, sprinkle them with a little salt and black pepper. Tip the salad leaves into a bowl and toss with 4 tablespoons of the dressing. Divide the salad between 4 plates, top with potatoes and then the steak. Drizzle over the remaining dressing and serve immediately."]
'Spicy lamb with chickpeas', ["700g cubed lamb","400g can tomatoes  in rich juice","2-3 tsp  harissa paste","410g can chickpeas , drained","handful fresh  coriander"], ["STEP 1","Rinse the lamb and pat dry with kitchen paper. Tip into a large pan and add tomatoes. Half fill the tomato can with water and add to the pan with the harissa paste and a good sprinkling of salt and pepper.","STEP 2","Bring the liquid to the boil, then reduce the heat, cover and simmer for 1-11⁄4 hours, until the lamb is tender. Rinse the chickpeas and add them to the pan, then simmer for a further 5 minutes.","STEP 3","Taste and add more seasoning if necessary. Roughly chop the coriander, then scatter over the dish. Serve with couscous or rice."]
'Grilled ham, egg & spiced oven chips', ["2 large baking potatoes","4 tbsp sunflower oil","¼ tsp paprika","¼ tsp cayenne pepper","2 thick slices ham","2 eggs","tomato ketchup , to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Cut the potatoes into chunky chips, place in a pan of salted water and bring to the boil. Simmer for 5 mins until softened slightly, then drain and leave to steam-dry for a few mins.","STEP 2","Pour 3 tbsp of the oil into a shallow baking tray and place in the oven to heat for 5 mins. Meanwhile, toss the chips with the paprika, cayenne pepper and some salt. Carefully tip the chips into the hot oil and return the tray to the oven to cook for 40 mins, tossing them halfway through cooking.","STEP 3","Ten mins before the chips are ready, heat a large griddle pan. Cook the ham slices for 3 mins each side until they are hot and have griddle lines on both sides. Transfer to a plate to keep warm. In a small frying pan, heat the remaining oil and fry the eggs to your liking. Top each slice of ham with an egg and serve with the oven chips, and ketchup if you like."]
'Cherry tomato & ham bread & butter bake', ["25g butter , softened","1 garlic clove , crushed","4 thick slices stale white bread","12 cherry tomatoes","50g ham , roughly chopped","500ml milk","3 eggs","50g cheddar , grated"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Mix the butter and garlic together, then use a little to grease a shallow baking dish or tin. Use the rest to butter the bread slices, then cut them in half diagonally.","STEP 2","Arrange the bread slices, overlapping, in the baking dish. Tuck the cherry tomatoes and ham in and around them.","STEP 3","Whisk the milk and eggs together, and season with salt and pepper. Pour over the bread and gently push the slices down in the liquid. Leave to stand for 5 mins. Scatter the cheese over the top, then bake for 35-40 mins until golden and just set. Serve with a crisp green salad."]
'Versatile veg soup', ["200g chopped  vegetables such as onions, celery and carrots","300g potatoes,  cubed","1 tbsp oil","700ml stock","crème fraîche and fresh herbs, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Fry the vegetables and potatoes in a pan with the oil for a few minutes until beginning to soften.","STEP 2","Cover with the stock and simmer for 10-15 mins until the veg is tender. Blend until smooth, then season. Serve with a dollop of crème fraîche and some fresh herbs. Will freeze for up to one month."]
'Chicken, ham, leek & roast potato pie', ["2 tbsp olive oil","400g chicken breast , cut into small chunks","140g thick-sliced ham , roughly chopped","roughly leftover roast potato , large ones halved","2 leeks , trimmed and sliced","1 heaped tbsp plain flour , plus extra for dusting","200ml white wine","400ml chicken stock","3 heaped tbsp crème fraîche","375g shortcrust pastry sheet (use fresh if you\'re freezing the pie)","beaten egg , to glaze"], ["STEP 1","Heat half the oil in a large frying pan and brown the chicken for about 5 mins. Tip into a 22 x 28cm ovenproof pie dish, then evenly scatter over the ham and roast potatoes. Heat the remaining oil and soften the leeks for about 5 mins, then stir in the flour for 1 min.","STEP 2","Pour in the wine and stock. Bring to the boil and, stirring continuously, boil rapidly to reduce to a thick sauce. Take off the heat, then stir in the crème fraîche and seasoning. Pour over the pie filling and leave to cool.","STEP 3","Unroll the pastry and cut off a small strip to make decorations (if you like). Roll the remainder to fit the dish and place on top of the pie. Use a fork to crimp the edges and press the pastry to the edge of the dish. Make a small hole in the centre, then cover well with cling film. Freeze for up to 3 months. For best results, defrost at room temperature for 8 hrs.","STEP 4","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Brush pie with egg to glaze (making sure the steam hole hasn’t sealed up). Cook for 30-40 mins, until golden and hot through."]
'Spiced French toast', ["4 tbsp soft butter","2 tsp cinnamon","2 eggs , beaten","100ml milk","4 hot cross buns , split in half","vanilla ice cream and maple syrup, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Mix 3 tbsp of the butter with half the cinnamon and mash together. Beat together the egg, milk and remaining cinnamon. Sandwich 2 slices of hot cross bun together with half the cinnamon butter and repeat with the remaining two slices.","STEP 2","Dip in the egg mix and leave to soak for a few secs. Heat the butter in a frying pan until foaming. Cook the hot cross buns for 1-2 mins each side until light golden (you may need to do this in two batches). Press down on them as you cook. Serve each portion topped with a scoop of ice cream and a drizzle of maple syrup, if you like."]
'Prawn & cod cakes', ["250g cod loin, skinless and boneless","175g cooked king prawns , chopped","175g mashed potato","small bunch chives , snipped","zest 1 lemon , plus 1 lemon cut into wedges, to serve","5 eggs , 1 beaten","50g breadcrumbs","2 tsp olive oil","200g green beans","100g cherry tomatoes","1 tbsp white wine vinegar"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 220C/200C fan/gas 7. In a small saucepan cover the cod with cold water and gently poach for 3-4 mins until just cooked through. Remove with a slotted spoon and pat dry. Flake into a medium bowl with the prawns, potato and most of the chives, lemon zest and some seasoning. Shape into 4 even-size cakes and chill for 10 mins.","STEP 2","Dip each cake in the beaten egg, then coat in the breadcrumbs, repeat with the remaining fish cakes. Brush each cake with 1 tsp of the olive oil, place on a roasting tray and cook for 25 mins, turning halfway through. Cook beans in salted boiling water for 3-4 mins, until tender, adding the tomatoes for the final min. Drain and toss through the remaining oil, vinegar and reserved chives, mashing the tomatoes lightly with a fork, season with some black pepper and set aside.","STEP 3","For the poached eggs bring a shallow pan of water to just boiling, stir the water once or twice and crack in the eggs. Poach for 3-4 mins, then remove with a slotted spoon. Serve the fishcakes topped with a poached egg and garnished with the beans and a few wedges of lemon for squeezing over."]
'Salmon & Puy lentil salad with olive dressing', ["85g Kalamata olive , stoned","5 tbsp olive oil","2 tbsp red wine vinegar","1 small garlic clove , crushed","1 tsp Dijon mustard","2 tbsp chopped basil (or a dash of pesto)","1 tbsp small capers","200g pack fine green bean , halved","3-4 eggs (depending on how much salmon you have)","2 x 250g pouches cooked Puy lentils (we used Merchant Gourmet)","4 large tomatoes , deseeded and roughly chopped","175g-200g cooked leftover salmon , flaked into large chunks","good handful rocket leaves"], ["STEP 1","Chop half the olives (set the rest aside), then mix with the remaining dressing ingredients in a bowl.","STEP 2","Boil the green beans for 5 mins, then refresh under cold water. Put the eggs in cold water, bring to the boil, then cook for 5 mins. Cool, shell and halve or quarter.","STEP 3","Heat the lentils in the microwave for 2 mins per pack. Tip into a bowl and toss with the tomatoes, most of the dressing, the whole olives and green beans. Arrange eggs and salmon on top, scatter with the rocket and finish with remaining dressing. Serve with crusty bread."]
'Honey-mustard chicken pasta', ["300g farfalle or other pasta shape","3 tbsp reduced-fat mayonnaise (use full-fat if you prefer)","1 heaped tsp wholegrain mustard","1 tsp clear honey","300g cooked chicken , torn into rough pieces","4 spring onions , thinly sliced (or use ½ red onion, thinly sliced)","small bunch basil , leaves roughly torn","4 tomatoes , quartered, then each chunk halved"], ["STEP 1","Boil the pasta, then cool under running water. Mix the mayo, mustard and honey in a large bowl and loosen with a little water to make a dressing the consistency of double cream. Add the pasta, chicken, onions, basil and tomatoes, season to taste, then gently mix together."]
'Smoked salmon carbonara', ["200g quick-cook spaghetti","1 tsp butter","1 garlic clove , crushed","150ml double cream","2 eggs , beaten","3 tbsp freshly grated parmesan","120g pack smoked salmon trimmings","½ small bunch chives , snipped"], ["STEP 1","Cook the spaghetti. Meanwhile, melt the butter in a small pan, add the garlic and gently sizzle for 1 min. Remove from the heat.","STEP 2","Lightly beat the cream, eggs, softened garlic and half the Parmesan in a bowl. Stir in the smoked salmon trimmings.","STEP 3","Drain the pasta well and return to the pan. Add the salmon mixture and the chives, then toss well so the heat from the pasta lightly thickens the sauce. Serve scattered with the remaining Parmesan and plenty of black pepper."]
'Chicken soup', ["1 tbsp olive oil","2 onions, chopped","3 medium  carrots, chopped","1 tbsp  thyme leaves, roughly chopped","1.4l chicken stock","300g leftover roast chicken, shredded and skin removed","200g frozen peas","3 tbsp Greek yogurt","1  garlic clove, crushed","squeeze of lemon juice","cheese scone, to serve (see tips below)"], ["STEP 1","Heat the olive oil in a large heavy-based pan. Add the onions, carrots and thyme leaves, then gently fry for 15 mins.","STEP 2","Stir in 1.4l chicken stock, bring to a boil, cover, then simmer for 10 mins.","STEP 3","Add the leftover roast chicken, remove half the mixture, then purée with a stick blender. Tip back into the pan with the rest of the soup, the peas and seasoning, then simmer for 5 mins until hot through.","STEP 4","Mix the Greek yogurt, garlic and lemon juice together. Ladle the soup into bowls, swirl in the garlic yogurt, then serve.","STEP 5","If you want to use a slow cooker, gently fry the onions, carrots and thyme leaves for 15 mins, then tip them into the slow cooker with 1 litre stock. If you\'re using a chicken carcass, add it now. Cover and cook for 2-3 hours on High until the veg is tender. If you used a carcass, remove it now, shredding any remaining chicken from the bones. Stir back into the soup, or add the leftover roast chicken and frozen peas. Cook for 30 mins more. Remove half the mixture and purée with a stick blender, then serve as above."]
'Ham, leek & potato pie', ["2 tbsp butter","1 large onion, finely chopped","3 leeks, finely sliced","2 large potatoes, cut into small cubes","2 tbsp plain flour, plus extra for dusting","300ml chicken or ham stock","100ml pot crème fraîche (or use leftover double cream)","2 tsp wholegrain mustard","200g cooked ham, shredded","4 bay leaves, optional","375g pack puff pastry","1 egg, beaten, to glaze (or use milk)"], ["STEP 1","Heat a large frying pan, melt the butter, then add the onion and leeks. Cover, then very gently cook for 15 mins until soft. Add the potatoes after 5 mins cooking.","STEP 2","Stir in the flour, turn up the heat, then add the stock, stirring until the mix thickens a little. Take off the heat, then stir in the crème fraîche, mustard and ham. Season to taste, then cool, if you have time. Spoon the mix into a large pie dish, adding a couple of bay leaves. Heat oven to 220C/fan 200C/gas 7.","STEP 3","Roll out the pastry on a floured surface to the thickness of a £1 coin. Cut a pastry strip the same width as the lip of the dish, wet the edge of the dish with egg, then fix the strip around it. Brush the top with egg, then lay over the remaining pastry.","STEP 4","Trim pastry to the edge of the dish, then ruffle the cut edges with the knife blade to help the layers rise. Cut a few slits to let the steam escape, decorate with bay leaves, if you like, then brush all over the top with egg. Can be done up to a day ahead, keep chilled. Bake for 30 mins until risen."]
'Leftover lamb & potato pie', ["leftover  lamb , about 200g-300g/7oz-11oz","100g leftover gravy , if you have any, or a splash of lamb stock","leftover potatoes , about 250g/9oz","50g cheese , grated","2 tbsp breadcrumb , with mixed herbs"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Carve all leftover lamb off the bone, roughly chop and place in an ovenproof dish, or 2 individual pie dishes. Pour over some gravy, or if there’s none left, just a bit of stock to moisten. Crumble the leftover potatoes over, then scatter with cheese and any leftover herb crumbs. Bake in the oven for 30 mins until golden on top and bubbling around the edge. If you’ve got any greens leftover, then quickly stir-fry to reheat and serve alongside."]
'Barney’s Monday night rice', ["2 tbsp  vegetable oil","1 egg , beaten with about 2 tbsp water","1 onion , chopped","2 garlic cloves , crushed","1 heaped tbsp curry powder","2 tbsp  tomato ketchup","a large handful of frozen  peas   (about 85g/3oz)","250g leftover cold cooked  rice  (any type) or a 250g pouch of ready cooked rice","175g cooked chicken or  pork , shredded into strips","a good splash of  soy sauce"], ["STEP 1","Heat half the oil in a large non-stick frying pan over a highish heat. Pour in the beaten egg, swoosh it around the pan and leave it to set for a minute. Flip it over like a pancake and let it cook for a minute more on the otherside, then tip it out flat on to a plate.","STEP 2","Heat the remaining oil in the same pan. Tip in the onion and sizzle for 3-4 minutes until it’s starting to brown, then stir in the garlic, curry powder and ketchup. Add the peas and cook for a minute or two until they start to defrost. Tip in the rice, cooked meat and a glass of water (100ml/31⁄2fl oz) and cook over a medium heat for 5-6 minutes, stirring as you go, until everything’s piping hot and the rice has taken on the colour of the curry powder.","STEP 3","While your rice is frying, shred the omelette into long strips. Toss the omelette and soy sauce through the rice and cook for a moment more. Scoop the rice on to plates straight from the pan and serve with extra soy sauce for sprinkling over."]
'Four & twenty chicken & ham pie', ["1 large onion , chopped","1 tbsp butter , plus extra for greasing","1 tbsp chopped  sage","1 tsp ground mace","300g boneless, skinless  chicken thigh (about 3)","1kg cooked  ham , trimmed of fat and thickly sliced","50g shelled pistachio","50g cranberry (fresh or frozen)","50g dried apricot , diced","3 tbsp chopped parsley","good grating  nutmeg","700g skinless  chicken breast , halved to thin","chutney and  salad to serve, (optional)","375g plain white flour","375g strong  white flour","140g butter","175g lard","1 egg , beaten","3 gelatine leaves","500ml strong chicken stock , heated"], ["STEP 1","Soften the onion in the butter with the sage and mace. Cool for a few mins while you whizz the chicken thighs and 300g of the ham in a food processor until minced. Scrape into a large bowl and stir in the softened onion, pistachios, cranberries, apricots and parsley. Season with nutmeg, lots of black pepper and some salt.","STEP 2","Grease a deep, 20cm round springform or loose-bottomed tin, then line with baking parchment. To make the pastry, mix together the flours and 2 tsp salt in a large bowl, then make a well in the centre. Put the butter and lard into a small pan with 200ml water and very gently melt. Once melted, turn up the heat and when just bubbling, pour into the well and stir with a wooden spoon to a dough – don’t worry if some powdery bits remain.","STEP 3","Once cool enough to handle, knead in the bowl until the dough comes together, then tip onto your work surface. Set aside a third, wrapped in a clean tea towel to keep it as warm and pliable as possible, while you quickly roll the remaining dough into a large circle – big enough to line the tin with a little overhanging.","STEP 4","Ease the circle into the tin, pressing evenly into the corners and side – you can be rough with it. Evenly cover the base with half the remaining sliced ham, followed by half the chicken breasts and half the mince mixture, pressing firmly to pack. Repeat with the remaining ham and chicken, then a rounded dome of mince. Put a pie funnel, if you have one, on the top.","STEP 5","Roll the reserved dough to a circle large enough to easily cover the pie, cutting out a hole (if using a pie funnel). Brush the edge of the pie with some beaten egg and top with the pastry lid. Press to seal the edges before trimming the excess. Crimp the edges between your thumb and forefinger to seal thoroughly, then make a small hole in the middle to let steam escape (if not using a pie funnel). Brush the top of the pie with more beaten egg.","STEP 6","Heat oven to 200C/180 fan/gas 6. Bake the pie for 1 hr. Very, very carefully remove the pie from its tin, brush the top and side with more egg and bake for another 30 mins until browned and crisp. Leave to cool completely before chilling.","STEP 7","To make the jelly, soak the gelatine in cold water for 5-10 mins until soft. Squeeze out any excess water from the gelatine, then dissolve in the hot stock. Once cooled, carefully pour into your chilled pie through the small hole, using a funnel, until full – you may not need all the stock. Chill the pie for a few hrs. Serve with chutney and salad, if you like."]
'Leek, potato & ham flip-over pie', ["400g leftover cooked  potato  (roasted or boiled – see step 1)","1 leek , finely sliced","2heaped tbsp horseradish  sauce","5heaped tbsp crème fraîche","100g cooked  ham , chopped into small pieces","pinch of dried  thyme","375g packet ready-rolled  puff pastry","1 tbsp milk"], ["STEP 1","To make the filling, preheat the oven to 220C/gas 7/fan 200C. Slice your potato leftovers as best you can, then blanch the leek in boiling water for 3 minutes and drain. If you don’t have any leftovers, peel, halve and thickly slice a baking potato, then boil for 8 minutes, adding the sliced leek for the last 3 minutes. Drain. In a large bowl, mix the potato, leek, horseradish sauce, crème fraîche, ham and thyme, mushing up the potato slightly, then season well.","STEP 2","To make the pie, unroll the pastry rectangle onto a baking sheet. Pile the filling along the length of one half of the pastry, leaving a small gap on the outside edge. Brush milk round the edges of the pastry. Fold the uncovered side over the filling, then press the pastry edges together well, using the prongs of a fork, to seal. Make a few 6cm diagonal slashes in the top. (The pie can now be frozen for up to a month.)","STEP 3","To bake the pie, brush the pie with the remaining milk and bake for 30 minutes until golden brown. Leave to relax for a couple of minutes then cut into slices and serve with a green salad."]
'Quick fried rice', ["2 tsp oil","1  egg , beaten","2 rashers  bacon , chopped","175g mushrooms , sliced","200g  frozen  peas","1  garlic clove , crushed","small knob of  ginger , grated","2 tsp  dark  soy sauce , plus extra to serve","1 tsp sugar","250g  cooked  basmati rice"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a frying pan, then tip in the egg. Leave to set for 30 secs-1 min, swirling every now and again, then tip it out and finely slice. Add the bacon and mushrooms to pan, then fry until golden, about 3 mins. Add the peas, garlic and ginger, then cook for 1 min.","STEP 2","Mix the soy sauce and sugar together. Turn up the heat, add the cooked rice to the pan, heat through, then splash in the sweet soy sauce. Stir through the egg and serve straight away, with more soy sauce if you like."]
'Quick plum crumble', ["1kg plums (or apples), stoned and quartered","3 tbsp sugar","200g madeira cake , diced into cubes","5 tbsp double cream or custard","handful  flaked almond or chopped pistachios","icing sugar , for dusting"], ["STEP 1","Simmer the plums, covered, with 200ml water and sugar until softened. Tip into a baking dish and scatter over the madeira cake.","STEP 2","Drizzle with double cream, scatter with the nuts and dust with icing sugar. Bake at 180C/160C fan/gas 4, just until browning."]
'After-dinner mint cream', ["250g mascarpone","300ml double cream","2-3 tbsp  caster sugar","2-3 tbsp cream sherry (we used Harvey\'s Bristol Cream)","200g thin after-dinner  mints , plus 6 extra to serve"], ["STEP 1","Put the mascarpone, double cream, caster sugar and sherry in a bowl and whisk until thick enough to hold its shape. Break 200g of the after-dinner mints into small pieces, then beat these into the cream mixture. Spoon into tiny glasses or bowls and chill until needed. Add 1 more thin after-dinner mint to each dessert before serving"]
'Leftover veg & orange cake', ["200g butter , melted, plus extra for greasing","140g sultana or raisins","zest and juice 2 oranges , or 4 clementines","300g self-raising flour","300g light soft brown sugar","2 tsp mixed spice","1 tsp ground ginger","1 tsp bicarbonate of soda","4 large eggs , beaten with a fork","300g carrots, parsnips, pumpkin, butternut squash or swede , or a mixture, grated","200g icing sugar or fondant icing sugar","few crushed white sugar cubes"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Grease and line a 30 x 20cm baking or roasting tin with baking parchment. Mix the sultanas and zest and juice from 1 orange (or 2 clementines), and microwave on High for 2 mins.","STEP 2","Mix the flour, caster sugar, spices, bicarb and pinch of salt into a large bowl. Mix the eggs with the melted butter and sultana mixture, then tip into the dry ingredients and stir in with a wooden spoon. Stir in the grated veg, and scrape into the tin. Bake for 35 - 40 mins, or until a skewer poked in the centre comes out clean. Cool in the tin.","STEP 3","Once cool sift the icing sugar into a bowl and stir in remaining orange zest plus enough juice to make a runny icing. Drizzle all over the cake and scatter with the crushed sugar cubes. Leave to set, then slice into 15 squares to serve."]
'Pork & slaw sandwiches', ["2 roasted  pork shoulder chops (see \'Goes well with...\')","winter celeriac slaw (see \'Goes well with...\')","a little  wholegrain mustard , for spreading","4 burger buns , halved, and toasted if eating at home"], ["STEP 1","If you’re eating lunch at home, gently heat the meat in a microwave for a few mins, or wrap in foil and bake at 200C/180C fan/gas 6 for 8 mins. If you’re assembling packed lunches, there’s no need to heat. Thinly slice the pork.","STEP 2","Spread some mustard over the bun bottoms, then add the pork and a heap of slaw. Top with bun tops, wrap and keep cool until lunchtime or eat straight away."]
'Bubble & squeak', ["1 tbsp duck fat, goose fat or butter","4 rashers of  streaky bacon, chopped","1 onion, finely sliced","1 garlic clove, chopped","15-20 cooked Brussels sprouts, sliced, or leftover boiled cabbage, shredded","400g cold  leftover mashed potato, or cold crushed boiled potatoes"], ["STEP 1","Melt 1 tbsp duck\xa0fat, goose fat or butter\xa0in a non-stick pan, allow it to get nice and hot, then add 4 chopped streaky\xa0bacon rashers. As it begins to brown, add 1 finely sliced onion and 1 chopped garlic clove.","STEP 2","Next, add 15-20 sliced cooked Brussels sprouts or shredded boiled cabbage and let it colour slightly. All this will take 5-6 mins.","STEP 3","Add 400g cold mashed\xa0potato. Work everything together in the pan and push it down so that the mixture covers the base of the pan.","STEP 4","Allow the mixture to catch slightly on the base of the pan before turning it over and doing the same again. It’s the bits of potato that catch in the pan that define the term ‘bubble and squeak’, so be brave and let the mixture colour.","STEP 5","Cut into wedges and serve."]
'Greek lamb baguette', ["1 small baguette , cut lengthways","sprinkle olive oil and red wine vinegar","pinch dried oregano","handful leftover lamb","few slices red pepper and red or white onion","shredded lettuce","3 tbsp crumbled feta cheese"], ["STEP 1","Sprinkle the inside of the baguette with a little olive oil, vinegar, oregano and a little seasoning. Layer the lamb, salad veg and feta, then wrap tightly in cling film."]
'Cold roast beef with beetroot salad & horseradish cream', ["thin slices  leftover roast beef","3 small cooked beetroot , sliced, then cut into fine matchsticks","1 shallot , finely chopped","4 handfuls of a mix of bitter leaves, such as  frisée , mizuna and watercress","1 tbsp sherry vinegar","4 tbsp olive oil","selection  of micro-leaves , if you can get them","5 tbsp grated horseradish","4 tbsp crème fraîche","pinch mustard  powder","juice 1⁄2 lemon"], ["STEP 1","To make the horseradish cream, whisk all the ingredients together with salt and pepper until spoonable, then set aside. Lay the slices of beef on four serving plates. In a bowl, mix the beetroot, shallot and salad leaves together. Dress with the sherry vinegar and 3 tbsp of the olive oil, then gently toss.","STEP 2","Neatly pile a mound of salad into the centre of each plate and scatter some microleaves around the outside. Top the salad with a neat spoonful of horseradish cream, drizzle with the remaining olive oil and serve."]
'Warm lentil salad with Serrano, chicken & rocket', ["1 red onion , halved and very thinly sliced","1 tbsp sherry vinegar","handful flat-leaf parsley , roughly chopped","4 ripe tomatoes , roughly chopped","2 tsp small capers , drained","250g pouch ready-cooked Puy lentil (I used Merchant Gourmet)","2 tbsp extra-virgin olive oil , plus extra","8 slices Serrano ham","meat from 2 cooked chicken breasts , torn into pieces","100g bag wild rocket"], ["STEP 1","Put the onion in a bowl, drizzle over the vinegar, then season with salt and pepper. Set aside for 10 mins or so until the onion has softened slightly.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, in another large bowl, mix the parsley and tomatoes with the capers. When ready to serve, tip the lentils into a sieve and rinse with boiling water from the kettle. Drain. Toss the onions and their juices into the lentils, then add the 2 tbsp olive oil and carefully mix everything together. Scoop this onto a large serving platter, then top with the ham, chicken and rocket. Drizzle with more olive oil and a little more vinegar, if you like, then serve."]
'Winter cobb salad', ["6 rashers smoked streaky bacon","2 Little Gem lettuces , chopped","4 celery sticks, chopped","1 cooked chicken breast and 1 cooked chicken leg, skinned and shredded","75g blue cheese , crumbled","2 hard-boiled eggs , halved","crusty bread (optional)","4 tbsp olive oil","2 tbsp white wine vinegar","1 tbsp Dijon mustard","1-2 tsp clear honey","2 spring onions , finely sliced"], ["STEP 1","Fry the bacon until crisp and cooked through, then very roughly chop.","STEP 2","To make the dressing, mix the olive oil, vinegar, mustard and honey with 1 tbsp water and some seasoning. Save 2 tbsp in the fridge for another salad (see \'Goes well with\'). Stir the spring onions into the rest of the dressing.","STEP 3","Use the chopped lettuce and celery as a base, then arrange the bacon, chicken, blue cheese and hard-boiled eggs on top and drizzle over the dressing. Serve with bread, if you like."]
'Sausageball pasta bake', ["450g sausagemeat","50g fresh white breadcrumb","1 tsp thyme or rosemary leaves, chopped","1 tbsp olive oil","500g carton passata","2 tbsp sundried tomato paste","300g fusilli or other  pasta shapes","½ small Savoy cabbage , cut into 1cm-wide slices","250g ball mozzarella , cubed","2 tbsp freshly grated parmesan"], ["STEP 1","Put the sausagemeat, breadcrumbs and thyme or rosemary in a bowl and mix to combine. Shape into 20 small balls.","STEP 2","Heat oil in a wide pan and cook the sausageballs for 10 mins until nicely browned. Add passata and tomato paste, cover and simmer gently for 20 mins.","STEP 3","Meanwhile, cook pasta following pack instructions, adding the cabbage for the final 5 mins of cooking time. Drain cabbage and pasta, toss with the sauce and spoon into a heatproof dish.","STEP 4","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/ gas 6. Push mozzarella cubes into the top of the pasta. Sprinkle with Parmesan and bake for 15-20 mins until bubbling and crusty."]
'Hot cross bread & lemon pudding', ["knob of butter , for the dish","4 stale hot cross buns","200g lemon curd","2 large eggs","200ml double cream","200ml milk","½ tsp vanilla extract","4 tbsp caster sugar","little  lemon zest","cream or vanilla ice cream , to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Butter a 1-litre baking dish that will quite snugly fit the buns. Cut each bun into 3 slices, and sandwich back together with a generous spreading of curd. Arrange buns in the dish.","STEP 2","Whisk egg, cream, milk and remaining curd, then sieve into a jug with the vanilla and 3 tbsp of the sugar. Pour over the buns and stand at room temperature for 30 mins for the custard to soak in.","STEP 3","Heat oven to 160C/140C fan/ gas 3. Scatter the remaining sugar and lemon zest over the pudding. Bake for 30-40 mins until the top is golden and the custard gently set. Stand for 5 mins, then serve with cream or vanilla ice cream, if you like."]
'Pea & ham soup', ["knob of butter","1 onion, chopped","1 medium potato, peeled and diced","1l ham or pork stock (see \'Try\', below)","500g frozen petit pois","300g thickly sliced ham, trimmed of any fat and diced"], ["STEP 1","Heat a knob of\xa0butter in a saucepan and when lightly foaming gently cook 1 chopped onion\xa0until softened, but not coloured.","STEP 2","Tip in 1 peeled and diced medium\xa0potato and stir to coat in butter, then pour over 1l ham or pork stock. Simmer until softened.","STEP 3","Tip in 500g\xa0frozen petit pois and bring back to the boil. Cook for a couple of mins.","STEP 4","Remove from the heat and blend until smooth. Stir in 300g\xa0diced ham and serve."]
'Moroccan turkey salad', ["2 pitta breads","2 tbsp olive oil","1 diced  aubergine","1 tbsp harissa","250g halved cherry tomato","500g shredded leftover turkey breast","100g rocket","seeds 1  pomegranate or 110g tub pomegranate seeds","a few  mint leaves"], ["STEP 1","Tear the pitta into pieces and fry in the olive oil until crisp. Tip into a bowl, then fry the aubergine for 10 mins until soft. Add to the pitta with the harissa, tomatoes, turkey and rocket. Toss well. Scatter over pomegranate seeds and mint leaves."]
'Cheeseboard soufflé & seasonal salad', ["50g butter , plus extra for greasing","25g plain flour , plus extra for dusting","200ml milk","300g leftover hard cheese , cut into chunks","100ml double cream or  crème fraîche","4 eggs , separated","grating of  nutmeg","pinch cayenne pepper","110g bag salad leaf","100g leftover blue or  goat\'s cheese , crumbled","50g leftover shelled nut","1 pear , sliced","3 tbsp salad dressing (use your favourite), to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Melt all the butter in a saucepan. Brush a 20cm soufflé dish with a little of it, then dust with flour. In the saucepan, stir the flour into the rest of the melted butter, then sizzle everything for 1 min. Gradually pour in the milk to make a white sauce, then add two-thirds of the cheese and carry on cooking to melt. Leave to cool slightly, then mix in the remaining cheese, the cream or crème fraîche and the egg yolks. Season, then add the nutmeg and cayenne pepper.","STEP 2","In a clean bowl, whisk the egg whites until stiff. Fold into the cheese sauce, then carefully tip into the soufflé dish. Bake the soufflé for 25 mins until puffed up and golden.","STEP 3","While the soufflé is cooking, toss the salad ingredients together. Once the soufflé is cooked, dress the salad and serve alongside."]
'Spanish chicken pie', ["1kg potatoes , chopped","3 tsp paprika (use smoked paprika if you have it)","2 tsp olive oil","2 onions , sliced","2 garlic cloves , crushed","2 x 400g cans chopped tomatoes","300g cooked chicken , shredded","140g roasted pepper from a jar, sliced (we like Karyatis)","handful Kalamata olives , halved"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/fan 180C/gas 6. Boil the potatoes for 15-20 mins until tender. Drain, return to the pan, then mash with some seasoning and 2 tsp of the paprika.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, heat the oil in a large pan, then fry the onions and garlic for a few mins until softened. Stir in the remaining paprika for 1 min, add the tomatoes , then, bring to a simmer. Tip into a large ovenproof dish, then stir in the chicken, peppers, olives and some seasoning.","STEP 3","Spoon over the mash, then bake for 15 mins until the mash is golden on top and the sauce is bubbling."]
'Ham & leek cobbler', ["2½ tbsp olive oil","450g leek , trimmed and thickly sliced","450ml vegetable stock","100g self-raising flour , plus a little extra for rolling the dough","75ml fat-free natural yogurt","1 tsp thyme leaves, plus extra to decorate","140g frozen pea","85g chunk of ham , shredded","1 small apple or ½ large apple, grated"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/fan 180C/gas 6. Heat ½ tbsp oil in a large pan, then fry the leeks, stirring for 5 mins until starting to soften. Add the stock, then simmer for 5 mins.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, tip the flour into a bowl, make a well in the centre, then add the yogurt, remaining oil, thyme leaves and a little salt. Using a cutlery knife, mix to bring together to a soft dough. Divide into 4 and shape into rounds on a floured surface.","STEP 3","Stir the peas, ham and grated apple into the leeks, then divide between 4 individual pie dishes or one large dish. Top each with a round of dough, scatter with more thyme, then bake for 20 mins until golden."]
'Brie bruschetta with tomato, herbs & Serrano ham', ["2 tbsp olive oil","2 shallots , finely chopped","125ml double cream","small bunch chives , snipped","4 thick slices white bloomer-style bread","2 tomatoes , sliced","10-12 slices leftover brie or camembert","4slices Serrano ham or prosciutto","rocket leaves, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat 1 tsp olive oil in a saucepan and gently cook the chopped shallots for 2 mins until soft but not coloured. Pour in the cream, bring it to a simmer, then reduce by about half. The cream will look like a thick sauce at this point. Stir in the chives.","STEP 2","Heat grill to high. Brush the remaining olive oil over the bread and grill on both sides until toasted. Top each slice with some tomato, then cheese, then Serrano ham, and finally spread over about 1 tbsp of the thickened cream to cover the ham. Place back under the hot grill until the cream starts to colour and glaze and the cheese has begun to melt. Serve with rocket leaves scattered over the top."]
'Broccoli soup with cheese toasties', ["1 large potato , diced","1.2l chicken or vegetable stock","400g broccoli , chopped into florets","7 slices bread","175g cheese , grated – cheddar, red leicester or any blue cheese","1 egg , beaten","3 spring onions , chopped","few drops Worcestershire sauce"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Put the potato and stock in a saucepan and bring to the boil, turn down to simmer for 10 mins until the potato is tender, then add the broccoli and some seasoning and cook for another 4-5 mins. Blend the soup until smooth, then return to the pan and keep warm while you make the toasties.","STEP 2","Whizz 1 slice of bread to make crumbs, then stir in the cheese, egg and onions. Spread over 3 slices of bread, add a dash of Worcestershire sauce, and sandwich each one together with the remaining slices. Brush with oil and bake for 10 mins, turning halfway through, until the outside is crisp and golden and middle melted. Cut into triangles and serve with the soup."]
'Marmalade & whisky bread & butter pudding', ["8 slices day-old crusty white bread , crusts removed","50g very soft butter","4 tbsp Seville orange marmalade , plus 4 tsp","300ml full-fat milk","248ml pot double cream","3 large eggs","seeds 1 vanilla pod","4 tbsp golden caster sugar","1 tbsp whisky","icing sugar , for dusting"], ["STEP 1","Butter each piece of bread on both sides, then spread 4 with the 1 tbsp marmalade each. Pop the remaining bread on top to make 4 marmalade sandwiches. Cut into triangles and nestle in rows in a large baking dish. Heat oven to 160C/140C fan/gas 3.","STEP 2","Beat the milk, cream, eggs, vanilla, sugar and whisky together, then pour over the bread. Leave to soak for 30 mins.","STEP 3","Dot the remaining marmalade all over the top of the pud and dust with the icing sugar. Bake for 45 mins-1 hr or until puffy and starting to caramelise where the bread breaks out of the custard. Serve hot or warm."]
'Red cabbage & potato hash', ["800g diced  potato","25g butter , plus more for grilling","100g-300g Festive red salad (see \'goes well with\')","fried eggs and leftover  ham , to serve"], ["STEP 1","Boil potatoes until tender. Melt the butter in a shallow pan (ovenproof if you have it), then fry Festive red salad for a few mins to soften. Stir in the well-drained spuds with some seasoning, press down and carry on cooking to crisp the bottom and heat through.","STEP 2","If you like, dot the top with a bit more butter and grill to crisp it up. Eat with fried eggs and slices of leftover ham, if you like."]
'Cheese, leek & potato tortilla', ["butter , for frying","1   leek , thinly sliced","225g potatoes cooked and cooled (about 1-2 medium size ones)","6 eggs","85g cheddar","1 tbsp sage , finely chopped (or 1 tsp dried sage), optional"], ["STEP 1","Melt a knob of butter in a medium, nonstick frying pan, then cook the leek for about 5 mins until softened. Meanwhile, cut the potatoes in half, then into slices about ½cm thick. Beat the eggs, season, then stir in the cheese and sage.","STEP 2","Add a little extra butter to the pan if needed, tip in the potatoes, then the egg mixture. Turn the heat to low, then cook for 10 mins until nearly set. Place under a hot grill, then cook for a couple of mins more until the top is set and golden. Slice into wedges and serve with a green salad."]
'Bread pudding', ["500g white or wholemeal bread","500g/1lb 2oz mixed dried fruit","85g mixed peel","1½ tbsp mixed spice","600ml milk","2 large  eggs, beaten","140g light muscovado sugar","zest 1 lemon (optional)","100g butter, melted","2 tbsp demerara sugar"], ["STEP 1","Tear 500g white or wholemeal\xa0bread into a large mixing bowl and add 500g mixed dried\xa0fruit, 85g mixed peel and 1 ½ tbsp mixed spice.","STEP 2","Pour in 600ml\xa0milk, then stir or scrunch through your fingers to mix everything well and completely break up the bread.","STEP 3","Add 2 beaten large eggs, 140g light muscovado sugar and\xa0zest\xa0of 1 lemon, if using. Stir well, then set aside for 15 mins to soak.","STEP 4","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Butter and line the base of a 20cm non-stick square cake tin (not one with a loose base).","STEP 5","Stir the melted butter into the pudding mixture, tip into the tin, then scatter with demerara.","STEP 6","Bake for 1½ hrs until firm and golden, covering with foil if it starts to brown too much. Turn out of the tin and strip off the paper. Cut into squares and serve warm."]
'Ham, cheese & mushroom turnovers', ["250ml milk","1 tbsp each butter and flour, mixed to a paste, plus extra for dusting","140g button mushroom , cut into quarters","1 tbsp olive oil","140g ham , chopped into small pieces","85g leftover cheese (amount will vary according to type - go with your taste buds), cut into small pieces","1 tbsp chopped herbs - tarragon, parsley and chives all work well","500g block puff pastry","1 egg , beaten"], ["STEP 1","The first thing to do is to make a thick white sauce that will be the base of the turnover filling. Bring the milk to a simmer, then add the butter and flour paste. Whisk the paste into the simmering milk and allow it to boil for 3-4 mins, whisking gently all the time to prevent it from catching. You should now have a very thick white sauce. Cool the sauce in a bowl. Fry the mushrooms in the oil for 3-5 mins until golden, then leave to cool.","STEP 2","Place the ham, cheese and mushrooms into a bowl, then gradually add the white sauce until everything is well coated. Finally, add the herbs.","STEP 3","Roll out the pastry on a floured surface to about the thickness of a £1 coin and cut out 4 saucer-size rounds (about 18cm wide), re-rolling the trimmings if you need to. Brush the edges of each round with beaten egg. Spoon the mixture onto 1 side of each round, then fold over and seal the edges well. The turnovers can now be frozen for up to 1 month. Brush the turnover with the remaining egg, then chill for 30 mins.","STEP 4","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Place the turnovers on a baking sheet and bake for about 35 mins until puffed up and golden. Leave to cool slightly and enjoy warm."]
'Banoffee traybake', ["200g butter , softened, plus extra for the tin","2 large ripe bananas (250g peeled weight)","250g light brown soft sugar","4 large eggs","1½ tsp vanilla extract","250g self-raising flour","100g natural yogurt","100g dark chocolate , chopped into chunks","100g thick caramel or dulce de leche (we used a can of Carnation caramel)","12 dried banana chips , to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Butter and line a 20 x 30cm baking tin with two strips of criss-crossed baking parchment. In a jug, mash the bananas with a fork, then add the butter and sugar and mix with an electric\xa0whisk until smooth and creamy.","STEP 2","Add the eggs one at a time, beating well after each addition, then add the vanilla and a pinch of salt. Use a spatula to fold through the flour, yogurt and chocolate chunks. Scrape the mixture into the tin and smooth over the surface. Bake for 30 mins until risen and golden and a skewer inserted into the centre of the cake comes out clean. Cool for 10 mins in the tin, then transfer to a wire rack.","STEP 3","Cut the traybake into 12 squares, then top each one with a spoonful of caramel and a banana chip, if you like. Will keep in a tin for up to five days, or in the freezer – without the toppings – for up to a month."]
'Luscious lemon baked cheesecake', ["225g digestive biscuits","100g butter, melted","250g tub  mascarpone","600g soft cheese","2 eggs, plus 2 yolks","zest 3 lemons, juice of 1","4 tbsp  plain flour","175g caster sugar","½ a 284ml pot soured cream","3 tbsp lemon curd","handful  raspberries, to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/fan 160C/gas 4. Line the bottom of a 23cm springform tin with greaseproof paper. Tip the biscuits and melted butter into a food processor, then blitz to make fine crumbs. Press into the tin and chill.","STEP 2","Whisk all the other ingredients in a large bowl until completely combined, pour into the tin, then bake for 35-40 mins until the cheesecake has a uniform wobble.","STEP 3","Turn off the oven and leave the cake inside until cool. When it is completely cooled, remove from the tin and top with soured cream. Swirl lemon curd over the top and decorate with raspberries, if you like."]
'Guinness chocolate puddings', ["150g unsalted butter , plus extra for the ramekins","200g dark chocolate (70% cocoa), roughly chopped","90g golden caster sugar","3 large eggs","90ml Guinness or other stout","clotted cream or thick double cream, to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Butter four 9 x 5cm ramekins and set aside. Tip the butter, chocolate and a generous pinch of salt into a heatproof bowl. Set over a small pan of just-simmering water and stir until melted, then remove from the heat and leave to cool a little.","STEP 2","Put the sugar and eggs in a large mixing bowl and beat with an electric whisk until pale, almost doubled in volume and thick enough to leave a trail when the beaters are lifted up. Gently fold in the melted chocolate and the Guinness. Spoon the mixture into the ramekins, then chill in the fridge for 1 hr. Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6 and put a baking tray on the top shelf to heat up.","STEP 3","Place the ramekins on the hot baking tray and bake for 18 mins. Remove from the oven and leave to stand for a minute, then serve with a dollop of cream, if you like."]
'Irish soda bread', ["250g plain white flour","250g plain wholemeal flour","100g porridge oats","1 tsp bicarbonate of soda","1 tsp salt","25g butter, cut in pieces","500ml buttermilk"], ["STEP 1","Preheat the oven to 200C/gas 6/fan 180C and dust a baking sheet with flour. Mix the dry ingredients in a large bowl, then rub in the butter. Pour in the buttermilk and mix it in quickly with a table knife, then bring the dough together very lightly with your fingertips (handle it very, very gently). Now shape it into a flat, round loaf measuring 20cm/8in in diameter.","STEP 2","Put the loaf on the baking sheet and score a deep cross in the top. (Traditionally, this lets the fairies out, but it also helps the bread to cook through.) Bake for 30-35 minutes until the bottom of the loaf sounds hollow when tapped. If it isn’t ready after this time, turn it upside down on the baking sheet and bake for a few minutes more.","STEP 3","Transfer to a wire rack, cover with a clean tea towel (this keeps the crust nice and soft) and leave to cool. To serve, break into quarters, then break or cut each quarter in half to make 8 wedges or slices – or simply slice across. Eat very fresh."]
'Vintage chocolate chip cookies', ["150g salted butter, softened","80g light brown muscovado sugar","80g granulated sugar","2 tsp vanilla extract","1 large egg","225g plain flour","½ tsp bicarbonate of soda","¼ tsp salt","200g plain chocolate chips or chunks"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 190C/fan170C/gas 5 and line two\xa0baking sheets\xa0with non-stick baking paper.","STEP 2","Put 150g softened salted butter, 80g light brown muscovado sugar and 80g granulated sugar into a\xa0bowl\xa0and\xa0beat\xa0until creamy.","STEP 3","Beat in 2 tsp vanilla extract and 1 large egg.","STEP 4","Sift 225g plain flour, ½ tsp bicarbonate of soda and ¼ tsp salt into the bowl and mix it in with a wooden spoon.","STEP 5","Add 200g plain chocolate chips or chunks and stir well.","STEP 6","Use a teaspoon to make small scoops of the mixture, spacing them well apart on the baking trays. This mixture should make about 30 cookies.","STEP 7","Bake for 8–10 mins until they are light brown on the edges and still slightly soft in the centre if you press them.","STEP 8","Leave on the tray for a couple of mins to set and then lift onto a\xa0cooling rack."]
'Salted caramel brownies', ["200g unsalted butter, plus a little extra for greasing","100g chocolate, 70% cocoa solids","100g chocolate, 50% cocoa solids","397g can Carnation caramel","1 tsp flaky sea salt, plus a little extra for the top","200g golden caster sugar","4 medium eggs, at room temperature","130g plain flour","50g cocoa powder"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4.","STEP 2","Grease then line a 23cm square traybake tin with baking parchment.","STEP 3","Melt 200g unsalted butter in a medium pan, break in 100g chocolate (70% cocoa solids) and 100g chocolate (50% cocoa solids), then remove the pan from the heat and wait for the cubes to melt.","STEP 4","In a small bowl, mix 175g\xa0Carnation caramel from a 397g can with 1 tsp sea salt – it will loosen up.","STEP 5","Put the rest of the caramel in a large bowl with 200g golden caster sugar and 4 medium eggs, and beat with an electric hand mixer or balloon whisk until even.\xa0Whisk in the chocolate and butter.","STEP 6","In another bowl, combine 130g plain flour, 50g cocoa powder and a good pinch of table salt, then sift this on top of the chocolate mix. Beat briefly until smooth.","STEP 7","Pour half the brownie batter into the tin and level it with a spatula.","STEP 8","Using a teaspoon, spoon half of the salted caramel on top of the batter layer in 5 thick, evenly spaced stripes.","STEP 9","Spoon the rest of the brownie batter on top and smooth it out, trying not to disturb the caramel beneath. Top with the rest of the caramel in the same stripy fashion. Drag a skewer or tip of a knife through the caramel to make a feathered pattern on the top.","STEP 10","Scatter with a little more sea salt, then bake for 25-30 mins or until risen all the way to the middle with a firm crust on top. When ready, the brownie will jiggle just a little when you shake the tin.","STEP 11","Let it cool completely in the tin, then cut into squares."]
'Doughnut muffins', ["140g golden caster sugar , plus 200g extra for dusting","200g plain flour","1 tsp bicarbonate of soda","100ml natural yogurt","2 large eggs , beaten","1 tsp vanilla extract","140g butter , melted, plus extra for greasing","12 tsp seedless raspberry jam"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 190C/170C fan/gas 5. Lightly grease a 12-hole muffin tin (or use a silicone one). Put 140g sugar, flour and bicarb in a bowl and mix to combine. In a jug, whisk together the yogurt, eggs and vanilla. Tip the jug contents and melted butter into the dry ingredients and quickly fold with a metal spoon to combine.","STEP 2","Divide two-thirds of the mixture between the muffin holes. Carefully add 1 tsp jam into the centre of each, then cover with the remaining mixture. Bake for 16-18 mins until risen, golden and springy to touch.","STEP 3","Leave the muffins to cool for 5 mins before lifting out of the tin and rolling in the extra sugar."]
'Classic Victoria sandwich recipe', ["200g caster sugar","200g softened butter","4 eggs, beaten","200g self-raising flour","1 tsp  baking powder","2 tbsp milk","100g butter, softened","140g icing sugar, sifted","drop vanilla extract (optional)","half a 340g jar good-quality strawberry jam","icing sugar, to decorate"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 190C/fan 170C/gas 5. Butter two 20cm sandwich tins and line with non-stick baking paper.","STEP 2","In a large bowl, beat 200g caster sugar, 200g softened butter, 4 beaten eggs, 200g self-raising flour, 1 tsp baking powder and 2 tbsp milk together until you have a smooth, soft batter.","STEP 3","Divide the mixture between the tins, smooth the surface with a\xa0spatula\xa0or the back of a spoon.","STEP 4","Bake for about 20 mins until golden and the cake springs back when pressed.","STEP 5","Turn onto a\xa0cooling rack\xa0and leave to cool completely.","STEP 6","To make the filling, beat the 100g softened butter until smooth and creamy, then gradually beat in 140g sifted icing sugar and a drop of vanilla extract (if you’re using it).","STEP 7","Spread\xa0the buttercream over the bottom of one of the sponges.\xa0Top it with 170g strawberry jam and sandwich the second sponge on top.","STEP 8","Dust with a little icing sugar before serving. Keep in an airtight container\xa0and eat within 2 days."]
'Chocolate & raspberry birthday layer cake', ["225ml sunflower oil , plus extra for the tins","250g caster sugar","3 large eggs","225ml milk","250g self-raising flour","4 tbsp cocoa","1½ tsp bicarbonate of soda","150g raspberry jam","100g frozen raspberries , defrosted","300ml double cream","2 tbsp icing sugar"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Oil and line two round 20cm springform cake tins with baking parchment. Whisk the oil, sugar, eggs and milk in a bowl until smooth. Sieve the flour, cocoa and bicarb into another large bowl, then gradually mix in the wet ingredients.","STEP 2","Divide the mixture between the tins and bake for 35-40 mins until the cakes are risen and spring back when pressed. Leave to cool in the tins for 10 mins, then transfer to a wire rack to cool completely.","STEP 3","For the raspberry layer, stir the jam and the defrosted raspberries together. Once the cakes are cool, whip the cream with the sugar to soft peaks, then gently fold half the raspberry mixture through the cream to create a ripple effect.","STEP 4","Spoon most of the reserved raspberry mixture over one of the cakes, then dollop on half of the cream. Smooth over with a palette knife, then place the other sponge on top. Swirl over the remaining cream and swirl the last of the raspberry mixture through it. Will keep in the fridge for two days."]
'Chocolate muffins', ["125g plain flour","25g cocoa powder","1 tsp baking powder","1 large egg","60g caster sugar","2 tbsp vegetable oil","100ml whole milk","50g chocolate chips (optional)","100g icing sugar"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Line a muffin tin with six muffin cases. Sieve the flour, cocoa and baking powder into a medium bowl. Mix together the egg,\xa0sugar, oil and milk together in a jug, then\xa0gradually pour\xa0into the dry ingredients (add chocolate chips now to make double chocolate muffins, if you\xa0like) and mix until combined.","STEP 2","Spoon the mixture evenly into the cake cases and bake for 20-25 mins until a skewer inserted into the middle comes out clean. Remove from the oven and leave to cool.","STEP 3","Meanwhile, gradually mix ½-1 tbsp water into the icing sugar until you have a loose consistency that\'s not\xa0too runny. Drizzle the icing over the\xa0muffins once cool."]
'Mary Berry’s orange layer cake', ["225g baking spread","225g self-raising flour","1 level tsp baking powder","100g golden caster sugar","100g brown sugar","4 large eggs","finely grated zest of 2 oranges","150g butter, softened","300g icing sugar, sifted","finely grated zest of 2 oranges","25g caster sugar","juice of 2 oranges"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. You will need 2 x 20cm loose-bottomed sandwich tins, greased and bases lined with baking parchment. Measure all the cake ingredients into a large bowl (reserve a little orange zest for decoration) and beat with a wooden spoon or electric hand mixer until combined and smooth.","STEP 2","Divide evenly between the 2 tins. Bake for 20-25 mins or until well risen, lightly golden and shrinking away from the sides of the tins. After 5 mins, remove from the tins and leave to cool on a wire rack.","STEP 3","To make the icing, put the butter and icing sugar into a bowl and mix with an electric hand mixer until light and fluffy. Stir in the orange zest.","STEP 4","Remove the paper from the cakes. Sit 1 cake upside down on a plate. Make the glaze by putting the caster sugar and orange juice into a saucepan, stirring over a low heat until the sugar has dissolved. Boil until reduced by half, then brush half on the upside-down cake, using a pastry brush. Spread half the butter icing over the glazed cake. Sit the other cake on top, brush with the remaining glaze, then spread with the remaining butter icing. Scatter with the reserved orange zest. The cake is best eaten on the day, but will keep for up to 3 days in a cool place. It freezes well un-iced or filled."]
'Bread in four easy steps', ["500g granary, strong wholewheat or white bread flour (I used granary)","7g sachet fast-action dried yeast","1 tsp salt","2 tbsp olive oil","1 tbsp clear honey"], ["STEP 1","Tip the flour, yeast and salt into a large bowl and mix together with your hands. Stir 300ml hand-hot water with the oil and honey, then stir into the dry ingredients to make a soft dough.","STEP 2","Turn the dough out onto a lightly floured surface and knead for 5 mins, until the dough no longer feels sticky, sprinkling with a little more flour if you need it.","STEP 3","Oil a 900g loaf tin and put the dough in the tin, pressing it in evenly. Put in a large plastic food bag and leave to rise for 1 hr, until the dough has risen to fill the tin and it no longer springs back when you press it with your finger.","STEP 4","Heat oven to 200C/fan 180C/gas 6. Make several slashes across the top of the loaf with a sharp knife, then bake for 30-35 mins until the loaf is risen and golden. Tip it out onto a cooling rack and tap the base of the bread to check it is cooked. It should sound hollow. Leave to cool."]
'Pimm’s cake', ["1 cucumber","zest and juice 1 lemon","300g butter , softened, plus extra for greasing","300g golden caster sugar","4 large eggs","1 tsp vanilla extract","400g self raising flour","1 ½ tsp baking powder","200g butter , softened","500g icing sugar","80g strawberries , hulled","200g butter , softened","400g icing sugar","juice & zest 1 lemon","100g strawberries , hulled and sliced plus 3 strawberries, halved, (stalks on)","3 tbsp Pimm\'s","¼ cucumber , sliced"], ["STEP 1","Put the sliced and halved strawberries for the filling and decoration into a small bowl and pour over the Pimm\'s. Leave to soak in for at least one hour or overnight. Heat oven to 190C /170C fan/gas 5. Line 3 x 20cm sandwich tins with baking parchment and grease with butter.","STEP 2","Cut the whole cucumber in half lengthways and using a teaspoon scrape out and discard the seeds. Roughly chop the rest of the cucumber and puree in a blender with the lemon juice.","STEP 3","In a large bowl and using electric beaters whisk up the softened butter with the sugar until pale and light. Continue whisking as you add the eggs, one at a time, whisking in between additions. Once all the eggs have been added pour in the cucumber purée, lemon zest and vanilla extract. Don’t worry if the mixture splits - it will come back together when you add the flour.","STEP 4","Fold in the flour and baking powder and whisk once again briefly until there are no lumps of flour remaining then divide the mixture between the three tins. Bake in the oven for 30-35mins or until a skewer pushed into the middle of the cakes comes out clean. Take the cakes out of the oven and leave to cool in their tins for five minutes then turn out onto wire racks to cool completely.","STEP 5","While the cakes are cooking and cooling make the buttercreams. To make the strawberry buttercream, mash the strawberries in a small bowl with a fork until mushy. In a larger bowl whisk up the butter and half the icing sugar until smooth, then whisk in the mashed strawberries followed by the remaining icing sugar. Whisk until smooth and pale pink and place in the fridge until needed. Repeat the process with the lemon buttercream.","STEP 6","Once the cakes are completely cold, put one of the cakes onto a cake turntable and add about one third of the lemon buttercream, spread over the surface evenly then top with half of the soaked strawberry slices. Next, spread one third of the strawberry buttercream onto another of the cakes and top with the remaining strawberry slices. Carefully stack the two filled layers with the final cake on top.","STEP 7","Transfer the remaining buttercreams to disposable piping bags and snip off the ends. Pipe the strawberry buttercream in rings around the outside of the cake, starting at the base. Once you reach three quarters of the way up, switch to the lemon buttercream and continue piping onto the top of the cake. Smooth over the top using a palette knife then smooth the sides with either a large palette knife or, better still a pastry scraper. Use long sweeping movements and gently turn the cake turntable so that you get a smooth finish but a subtle gradient effect where the two colours meet. Scrape any excess icing into a bowl.","STEP 8","To finish, top with the remaining soaked strawberry halves and the slices of cucumber."]
'Red velvet cupcakes', ["150g plain flour","1 tbsp cocoa powder","1 tsp bicarbonate of soda","50g butter , softened","150g caster sugar","1 large egg , beaten","1 tsp vanilla paste","100ml buttermilk or kefir","50ml vegetable oil","1 tsp white wine vinegar","1 tbsp red gel food colouring","100g slightly salted butter , softened","225g icing sugar","100g full fat cream cheese , stirred to loosen"], ["STEP 1","Line a cupcake tin with 12 cupcake cases and set aside. Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Sieve the flour, cocoa, bicarb and a pinch of fine salt into a medium bowl and mix to combine.","STEP 2","Using a stand mixer or\xa0an electric hand whisk, beat together the butter and sugar until light and fluffy, then beat in the egg, vanilla, buttermilk, oil and vinegar until combined. Gradually mix the wet ingredients into the dried. Once combined,\xa0mix in the red food colouring until you have a deep red mix –\xa0the colour may vary depending on what brand you use.","STEP 3","Divide the batter\xa0between the cupcake cases and bake for 15 mins,\xa0or until a skewer inserted into the centre of a cake comes out clean.","STEP 4","While\xa0the cakes are cooling, make the icing. Beat together the butter and icing sugar using an electric whisk or by\xa0hand until pale and fluffy, about 3 mins,\xa0then beat in the cream cheese for a further 1-2 mins until well combined.","STEP 5","Once the cakes are cool, use a\xa0piping bag\xa0fitted with a star nozzle\xa0to cover the cakes with the cream cheese icing, or dollop the icing on top using a spoon."]
'Monkey bread', ["200ml semi-skimmed milk","85g unsalted butter","2 large eggs","550g strong white bread flour , plus extra for kneading if doing it by hand","2½ tsp fast-action dried yeast","50g golden caster sugar","oil , for greasing","125g unsalted butter , plus extra for greasing","1 tbsp ground cinnamon","1 tsp ground ginger","1 tsp ground nutmeg","225g light muscovado sugar","140g pecans , toasted then roughly chopped","100g icing sugar , sifted","½ tsp vanilla extract","1 tbsp semi-skimmed milk","pinch of ground cinnamon","2 tbsp unsalted butter , melted"], ["STEP 1","Start with the dough. Put the milk and butter into a medium pan and heat gently until the butter melts and the milk is at a simmer. Cool for a few mins, then beat in the eggs with a fork. Mix the dry ingredients in a large bowl with 1½ tsp fine salt, then add the liquid and stir to a sticky dough. Leave for 5 mins, then tip onto a floured worktop and knead for 5-10 mins until smooth and springy. Use a little oil to grease a large bowl, add the dough, turn it in the oil to coat, then cover the bowl with clingfilm. Leave in a warm place for 1 hr or until doubled in size. Knead in a tabletop mixer with a dough hook if you prefer.","STEP 2","To assemble, grease a 25cm bundt pan with butter. Melt the rest of the butter in a pan. In a medium bowl mix the spices and sugar plus a pinch of salt. Spoon 2 tbsp melted butter, 3 tbsp spiced sugar and 4 tbsp pecans into the bottom of the tin.","STEP 3","Pull the dough into about 65 small pieces and roll into balls. Taking 4 or 5 at a time, dunk the dough balls into the melted butter, let the excess drain off, then tip them into the spiced sugar. Roll to coat, then put haphazardly into the tin. Repeat until there’s a full layer of dough in the tin. Scatter with the rest of the chopped nuts, then carry on filling the tin with the coated dough balls. Tip any leftover sugar and butter over the dough. Can be frozen now for up to 1 month. Defrost in the fridge then let prove.","STEP 4","Cover the pan with oiled clingfilm then leave to rise in a warm place for 1 hr, or until risen and the dough no longer springs back when you poke it.","STEP 5","Heat the oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Bake the monkey bread for 35 mins, or until well risen and golden. Let the pan cool for 5 mins, then give it a sharp rap on the counter. Leave in the tin until just warm.","STEP 6","Whisk all of the ingredients together to make the glaze. It will thicken as the melted butter cools. Turn the monkey bread onto a serving plate, then drizzle with the glaze. Let it set, if you can bear the wait."]
'Espresso martini cocktail fancies', ["250g butter , softened (plus extra for the tin)","4 large eggs","250g golden caster sugar","250g self-raising flour","½ tsp baking powder","1 tsp vanilla extract","6 tbsp coffee liqueur","100g butter , softened","100g icing sugar","1 tsp milk","6 tsp chocolate spread","1 tsp instant espresso powder","1kg pack fondant icing sugar","chocolate-covered coffee beans and melted chocolate"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Butter a 30 x 20cm tin and line with baking parchment. Put the cake ingredients in a bowl except for the liqueur. Whisk until smooth using an electric whisk, then transfer to the tin, smooth out and bake for 30-35mins until a skewer inserted in the centre comes out clean. Leave to cool completely.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, for the filling, whisk the butter, icing sugar and milk together until smooth, then transfer to a piping bag.","STEP 3","When the cake is cold, slice off the top so it’s flat, turn over, trim and cut into neat, approx. 4cm squares (four squares across and seven down). You should have 28. Dip each one briefly in the liqueur and sit dipped-side up. Put a tiny dot of chocolate spread on top of each cake, then pipe a raspberry-sized ball of the buttercream filling on top of each one.","STEP 4","For the icing, mix the espresso powder with 1 tsp water to dissolve, then mix with the fondant icing sugar and enough water to make it a condensed milk consistency. Put the cakes on wire racks set over trays to catch the drips, then coat each one in the icing. The best way to do this is to hold each one over the bowl of icing on a slotted spoon then generously drizzle over the icing with a tablespoon. Remove from the slotted spoon with a cutlery knife and sit on the rack to dry. Decorate with a drizzle of melted chocolate and a chocolate- covered coffee bean. Serve in cake cases, if you like. Will keep for two days in an airtight container.\xa0\\nWhy not also try our piña colada and strawberry daiquiri fancies?"]
'Classic scones with jam & clotted cream', ["350g self-raising flour, plus more for dusting","1 tsp baking powder","85g butter, cut into cubes","3 tbsp caster sugar","175ml milk","1 tsp vanilla extract","squeeze lemon juice  (see tips below)","beaten egg, to glaze","jam and clotted cream, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 220C/200C fan/gas 7. Tip the self-raising flour into a large bowl with ¼ tsp salt and the baking powder, then mix.","STEP 2","Add the butter, then rub in with your fingers until the mix looks like fine crumbs. Stir in the caster sugar.","STEP 3","Put the milk into a jug and heat in the microwave for about 30 secs until warm, but not hot. Add the vanilla extract and a squeeze of lemon juice, then set aside for a moment.","STEP 4","Put a\xa0baking tray in the oven. Make a well in the dry mix, then add the liquid and combine it quickly with a cutlery knife – it will seem pretty wet at first.","STEP 5","Scatter some flour onto the work surface and tip the dough out. Dredge the dough and your hands with a little more flour, then fold the dough over 2-3 times until it’s a little smoother. Pat into a round about 4cm deep. Take a 5cm cutter\xa0(smooth-edged cutters tend to cut more cleanly, giving a better rise) and dip it into some flour. Plunge into the dough, then repeat until you have four scones. You may need to press what’s left of the dough back into a round to cut out another four.","STEP 6","Brush the tops with a beaten egg, then carefully arrange on the hot baking tray. Bake for 10 mins until risen and golden on the top. Eat just warm or cold on the day of baking, generously topped with jam and clotted cream. If freezing, freeze once cool. Defrost, then put in a low oven (about 160C/140C fan/gas 3) for a few minutes to refresh."]
'Banana & blueberry muffins', ["300g self-raising flour","1 tsp bicarbonate of soda","100g light muscovado sugar","50g porridge oats, plus 1 tbsp for topping","2 medium bananas, the riper the better","284ml carton buttermilk","5 tbsp light olive oil","2 egg whites","150g punnet blueberries"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/fan 160C/gas 4 and line a 12-hole muffin tin with paper muffin cases. Tip the flour and bicarbonate of soda into a large bowl. Hold back 1 tbsp of the sugar, then mix the remainder with the flour and 50g oats. Make a well in the centre. In a separate bowl, mash the bananas until nearly smooth. Stir the buttermilk, oil and egg whites into the mashed banana until evenly combined.","STEP 2","Pour the liquid mixture into the well and stir quickly and sparingly with a wooden spoon. The mix will look lumpy and may have the odd fleck of flour still visible, but don’t be tempted to over-mix. Tip in the blueberries and give it just one more stir. Divide the mix between the muffin cases – they will be quite full – then sprinkle the tops with the final tbsp of the oats and the rest of he sugar. Bake for 18-20 mins until risen and dark golden. Cool for 5 mins in the tray before lifting out onto a rack to cool completely."]
'Belgian buns', ["450g strong white flour , plus extra for dusting","7g fast action yeast","75g caster sugar","165ml warm milk","1 large  egg , beaten plus 1 for egg wash","50g unsalted butter , melted, plus extra for the tray","5 tbsp lemon curd","150g sultanas","250g icing sugar","12 glacé cherries"], ["STEP 1","Mix\xa0the flour, yeast, caster sugar and 1 tsp sea salt in a large\xa0bowl. Make a well in the centre\xa0and pour in the warm milk, beaten egg and melted butter. Mix well\xa0a soft dough forms. If it feels dry, add a bit of warm water,\xa0if it feels too sticky and wet, add 1 tbsp flour.","STEP 2","Dust a work surface with flour and tip the mixture onto it. Knead\xa0the dough until it feels smooth and elastic. Shape into a ball and put in\xa0a large, lightly floured bowl. Cover and leave to rise in a warm place for 1 hr or until doubled in size. Or, leave to prove in the fridge overnight, removing\xa045 mins\xa0before continuing.","STEP 3","Line a large baking tray with non-stick baking paper. Lightly dust a work surface and roll out the dough to 30 x 45cm.\xa0Evenly spread the lemon curd over the dough and sprinkle with the sultanas. Roll the dough up lengthways from the shortest side, like a Swiss roll, to form a log. Cut into 12 equal sized buns with a sharp knife, egg-washing the loose end of the pastry and pressing it down, so it doesn’t unravel. Arrange, spread apart, on the prepared baking tray, cover, and leave to prove for 45 mins until doubled in size.","STEP 4","Heat the oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Brush the buns with a little egg wash. Bake\xa0for 10 mins, then reduce the temperature to 180C/160C fan/gas 4 and cook for a further 10 mins. Leave to cool.","STEP 5","Meanwhile, sieve the icing sugar and mix with 3 tbsp water until a thick, white icing forms.\xa0Spread the icing on top of the buns with the back of a spoon, then\xa0put a cherry in the middle of each one."]
'Easy vegan chocolate cake', ["a little dairy-free sunflower spread, for greasing","1 large ripe avocado (about 150g)","300g light muscovado sugar","350g gluten-free plain flour","50g good-quality cocoa powder","1 tsp bicarbonate of soda","2 tsp gluten-free baking powder","400ml unsweetened soya milk","150ml vegetable oil","2 tsp vanilla extract","85g ripe avocado flesh, mashed","85g dairy-free sunflower spread","200g dairy-free chocolate, 70% cocoa, broken into chunks","25g cocoa powder","125ml unsweetened soya milk","200g icing sugar, sifted","1 tsp vanilla extract","gluten-free and vegan sprinkles, to decorate"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 160C/140C fan/gas 3. Grease two 20cm sandwich tins with a little dairy-free sunflower spread, then line the bases with baking parchment.","STEP 2","Put 1 large avocado and 300g light muscovado sugar in a food processor and whizz until smooth.","STEP 3","Add 350g gluten-free plain flour, 50g cocoa powder, 1 tsp bicarbonate of soda, 2 tsp gluten-free baking powder, 400ml unsweetened soya milk, 150ml vegetable oil and 2 tsp vanilla extract to the bowl with ½ tsp fine salt and process again to a velvety, liquid batter.","STEP 4","Divide between the tins and bake for 25 mins or until fully risen and a skewer inserted into the middle of the cakes comes out clean.","STEP 5","Cool in the tins for 5 mins, then turn the cakes onto a rack to cool completely.","STEP 6","While you wait, start preparing the frosting. Beat together 85g ripe avocado flesh and 85g dairy-free sunflower spread with electric beaters until creamy and smooth. Pass through a sieve and set aside.","STEP 7","Melt 200g dairy-free chocolate, either over a bowl of water or in the microwave, then let it cool for a few mins.","STEP 8","Sift 25g cocoa powder into a large bowl. Bring 125ml unsweetened soya milk to a simmer, then gradually beat into the cocoa until smooth. Cool for a few mins.","STEP 9","Tip in the avocado mix, 200g sifted icing sugar, melted chocolate and 1 tsp vanilla, and keep mixing to make a shiny, thick frosting. Use this to sandwich and top the cake.","STEP 10","Cover with sprinkles or your own decoration, then leave to set for 10 mins before slicing. Can be made 2 days ahead."]
'Lemon drizzle cake', ["225g unsalted butter,  softened","225g caster sugar","4 eggs","225g self-raising flour","1 lemon, zested","1½ lemons, juiced","85g caster sugar"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4.","STEP 2","Beat together the butter and caster sugar until pale and creamy, then add the eggs, one at a time, slowly mixing through.","STEP 3","Sift in the self-raising flour, then add the lemon zest and mix until well combined.","STEP 4","Line a loaf tin (8 x 21cm) with greaseproof paper, then spoon in the mixture and level the top with a spoon.","STEP 5","Bake for 45-50 mins until a thin\xa0skewer inserted into the centre of the cake comes out clean.","STEP 6","While the cake is cooling in its tin, mix together the lemons juice and caster sugar to make the drizzle.","STEP 7","Prick the warm cake all over with a skewer or fork, then pour over the drizzle – the juice will sink in and the sugar will form a lovely, crisp topping.","STEP 8","Leave in the tin until completely cool, then remove and serve. Will keep in an airtight container for 3-4 days, or freeze for up to 1 month."]
'Triple chocolate & peanut butter layer cake', ["225ml rapeseed oil, plus more for the tins","250g self-raising flour","4 tbsp cocoa","1 ½ tsp bicarbonate of soda","225g caster sugar","3 tbsp golden syrup","3 large eggs, beaten","225ml milk","200g dark chocolate, chopped","2 tbsp chocolate chips","small handful pretzel pieces","2 tbsp honeycomb pieces","65g dark chocolate","250g soft salted butter","500g icing sugar","45g smooth peanut butter","1-2 tbsp cocoa","200ml double cream","100g dark chocolate, finely chopped","chocolate eggs, some hollow, some filled, gold lustre, toffee popcorn and pretzels"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Oil and line the base of three 19cm sandwich tins. Mix the flour, cocoa, bicarb and sugar in a bowl. Make a well in the centre and beat in the syrup, eggs, oil and milk with an electric whisk until smooth.","STEP 2","Divide the mix between the tins, and bake for 25-30 mins until the cakes are risen and firm to the touch. Cool in the tins for 10 mins before turning out onto a cooling rack and cooling completely. At this stage, they can be frozen, well wrapped, for up to eight weeks.","STEP 3","Make the bark while the cake is cooling.\xa0Melt the chocolate in short bursts in the microwave, stirring every 20 secs, until smooth. Spoon onto a parchment-lined baking tray and smooth over with a spatula to make a thinnish layer, around 35 x 20cm.\xa0Sprinkle over the chocolate chips along with the pieces of pretzel and honeycomb, then chill until solid. Remove the bark from the fridge and leave for a minute to come to room temperature before using a sharp knife to cut it into shards (if it’s fridge cold, the chocolate will snap rather than cut). Chill again until you’re ready to decorate the cake.","STEP 4","To make the icing, melt the chocolate in the microwave, stirring between short blasts, then leave to cool a little. Meanwhile, beat the butter, icing sugar and 1 tbsp boiling water with an electric whisk or stand mixer, slowly at first, then turn up the speed and beat until you get a pale, fluffy icing. Spoon out a third of the mix into a separate bowl and stir in the peanut butter. Whisk the melted chocolate into the remainder of the icing, then beat in the cocoa if you want a darker, more chocolatey-coloured icing.","STEP 5","Sandwich the three cakes together with the peanut butter icing. Use half the chocolate icing to coat the sides and top of the cake and fill in the edges between the layers, scraping off any excess. Chill for 20 mins. This is called a crumb coating, allowing you to get a really smooth finish when it comes to the final icing.","STEP 6","Spread the remaining chocolate icing over the lightly chilled cake, smoothing over the sides and top so you get a neat finish. Chill again for 20 mins.","STEP 7","To make the ganache, heat the cream in a small pan until steaming. Tip the dark chocolate into a bowl, then pour over the cream. Mix well until smooth and shiny. Transfer to a piping bag and leave to cool for a few mins at room temperature.","STEP 8","Pipe the ganache on top of the cake, nudging it over the edge and allowing it to drip down neatly. Do this all the way round the cake, then fill in the centre with more ganache. Smooth the top with a knife. Chill for 1 hr for the ganache to set.","STEP 9","Press the bark shards into the cake, sticking up. Add lots of chocolate eggs, popcorn and pretzels in and around the shards. Cut into slices to serve. Will keep for up to three days kept in a cool place in an airtight container."]
'Yummy golden syrup flapjacks', ["250g jumbo porridge oats","125g butter, plus extra for the tin","125g light brown sugar","2-3 tbsp golden syrup (depending on how gooey you want it)"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Put the oats, butter, sugar and golden syrup in a food processor and pulse until mixed – be careful not to overmix or the oats may lose their texture.","STEP 2","Lightly butter a 20 x 20cm baking tin and add the mixture. Press into the corners with the back of a spoon so the mixture is flat and score into 12 squares. Bake for around 15 mins until golden brown."]
'Ultimate chocolate cake', ["200g dark chocolate (about 60% cocoa solids), chopped","200g butter, cubed","1 tbsp instant coffee granules","85g self-raising flour","85g plain flour","¼ tsp bicarbonate of soda","200g light muscovado sugar","200g golden caster sugar","25g cocoa powder","3 medium  eggs","75ml buttermilk","50g grated chocolate or 100g curls, to decorate","200g dark chocolate (about 60% cocoa solids), chopped","300ml double cream","2 tbsp golden caster sugar",""], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 160C/fan 140C/gas 3. Butter and line a 20cm round cake tin (7.5cm deep).","STEP 2","Put 200g chopped dark chocolate in a medium pan with 200g butter.","STEP 3","Mix 1 tbsp instant coffee granules into 125ml cold water and pour into the pan.","STEP 4","Warm through over a low heat just until everything is melted – don’t overheat. Or melt in the microwave for about 5 minutes, stirring halfway through.","STEP 5","Mix 85g self-raising flour, 85g plain flour, ¼ tsp bicarbonate of soda, 200g light muscovado sugar,\xa0200g golden caster sugar and 25g cocoa powder, and squash out any lumps.","STEP 6","Beat 3 medium eggs with 75ml buttermilk.","STEP 7","Pour the melted chocolate mixture and the egg mixture into the flour mixture and stir everything to a smooth, quite runny consistency.","STEP 8","Pour this into the tin and bake for 1hr 25 – 1hr 30 mins.\xa0If you push a skewer into the centre it should come out clean and the top should feel firm (don’t worry if it cracks a bit).","STEP 9","Leave to cool in the tin (don’t worry if it dips slightly), then turn out onto a\xa0wire rack\xa0to cool completely. Cut the cold cake horizontally into three.","STEP 10","To make the ganache,\xa0put 200g chopped dark chocolate in a bowl.\xa0\xa0Pour 300ml double cream into a pan, add 2 tbsp golden caster sugar\xa0and heat until it is about to boil.","STEP 11","Take off the heat and pour it over the chocolate. Stir until the chocolate has melted and the mixture is smooth. Cool until it is a little thicker but still pourable.","STEP 12","Sandwich the layers together with just a little of the ganache. Pour the rest over the cake letting it fall down the sides and smooth over any gaps with a palette knife.","STEP 13","Decorate with 50g grated chocolate or 100g chocolate curls. The cake keeps moist and gooey for 3-4 days."]
'Bread pudding', ["500g white or wholemeal bread","500g/1lb 2oz mixed dried fruit","85g mixed peel","1½ tbsp mixed spice","600ml milk","2 large  eggs, beaten","140g light muscovado sugar","zest 1 lemon (optional)","100g butter, melted","2 tbsp demerara sugar"], ["STEP 1","Tear 500g white or wholemeal\xa0bread into a large mixing bowl and add 500g mixed dried\xa0fruit, 85g mixed peel and 1 ½ tbsp mixed spice.","STEP 2","Pour in 600ml\xa0milk, then stir or scrunch through your fingers to mix everything well and completely break up the bread.","STEP 3","Add 2 beaten large eggs, 140g light muscovado sugar and\xa0zest\xa0of 1 lemon, if using. Stir well, then set aside for 15 mins to soak.","STEP 4","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Butter and line the base of a 20cm non-stick square cake tin (not one with a loose base).","STEP 5","Stir the melted butter into the pudding mixture, tip into the tin, then scatter with demerara.","STEP 6","Bake for 1½ hrs until firm and golden, covering with foil if it starts to brown too much. Turn out of the tin and strip off the paper. Cut into squares and serve warm."]
'Freezer biscuits', ["200g pack  butter , softened","200g soft  brown sugar","2 eggs","1 tsp vanilla extract","200g self-raising flour","140g oats","50g chopped nuts such as pecan , hazelnuts or almonds","50g desiccated coconut","50g raisin , or mixed fruit"], ["STEP 1","When the butter is really soft, tip it into a bowl along with the sugar. Using an electric hand whisk or exercising some arm muscle, beat together until the sugar is mixed through. Beat in the eggs, one at a time, followed by the vanilla extract and a pinch of salt, if you like. Stir in the flour and oats. The mixture will be quite stiff at this point. Now decide what else you would like to add – any or all of the flavours are delicious – and stir through.","STEP 2","Tear off an A4-size sheet of greaseproof paper. Pile up half the mixture in the middle of the sheet, then use a spoon to thickly spread the mixture along the centre of the paper. Pull over one edge of paper and roll up until you get a tight cylinder. If you have problems getting it smooth, then roll as you would a rolling pin along a kitchen surface. You’ll need it to be about the width of a teacup. When it is tightly wrapped, twist up the ends and then place in the freezer. Can be frozen for up to 3 months.","STEP 3","To cook, heat oven to 180C/fan 160C/gas 4 and unwrap the frozen biscuit mix. Using a sharp knife, cut off a disk about ½cm wide. If you have difficulty slicing through, dip the knife into a cup of hot water. Cut off as many biscuits as you need, then pop the mix back into the freezer for another time. Place on a baking sheet, spacing them widely apart as the mixture will spread when cooking, then cook for 15 mins until the tops are golden brown. Leave to cool for at least 5 mins before eating."]
'Sticky stem ginger cake with lemon icing', ["225g self-raising flour","1 tsp bicarbonate of soda","1 tbsp ground ginger","1 tsp ground cinnamon","1 tsp ground mixed spice","115g butter, cut into cubes, plus extra for greasing","115g dark muscovado sugar","115g black treacle","115g golden syrup","250ml whole milk","85g drained stem ginger, finely grated","1 egg","50g icing  sugar, sifted","1 tsp finely grated lemon zest","1 tbsp lemon juice"], ["STEP 1","Preheat the oven to fan 160C/conventional 180C/gas 4. Butter and line an 18cm round, 7cm deep cake tin with greaseproof or parchment paper.","STEP 2","Put the flour, bicarbonate of soda and all the spices into a large mixing bowl. Add the butter and rub it into the flour with your fingertips until the mixture resembles fine breadcrumbs.","STEP 3","Put the sugar, treacle, syrup and milk in a medium saucepan and heat, gently stirring until the sugar has dissolved. Turn up the heat and bring the mixture to just below boiling point.","STEP 4","Add the stem ginger to the flour mixture, then pour in the treacle mixture, stirring as you go with a wooden spoon. Break in the egg and beat until all the mixture is combined and it resembles a thick pancake batter. Pour this into prepared tin and bake for 50 minutes-1 hour, until a skewer pushed into the centre of the cake comes out fairly clean. Leave to cool completely in tin before turning cake out. (To freeze: wrap in greaseproof paper, then in cling film. Freeze for up to 1 month.)","STEP 5","To make the icing, mix together icing sugar and lemon zest, then gradually add lemon juice until you have a smooth, slightly runny icing, adding more juice, if needed. Drizzle icing in a zig-zag pattern over surface of cake, turn cake around and drizzle again to create the cross-hatched finish (see below). Cake keeps for up to 2 weeks stored in an airtight container."]
'Cardamom buns', ["35 cardamom pods","350ml full-fat milk","200g butter , cubed","500g strong white bread flour , plus extra for dusting","225g golden caster sugar","7g sachet fast-action dried yeast","½ tsp ground cinnamon","vegetable oil or sunflower oil, for greasing","1 large egg , beaten","2 tbsp pearl sugar (available from ocado.com)"], ["STEP 1","Crack open 10 of the cardamom pods with a pestle and mortar, and tip into a saucepan. Add the milk and warm until steaming but not boiling. Add 50g butter (leave the remaining butter at room temperature to soften) and set aside to cool until lukewarm, swirling the pan from time to time to encourage the butter to melt.","STEP 2","Put the flour, 75g of the sugar, the yeast, cinnamon and 1 /2 tsp salt into a large bowl, or the bowl of a freestanding mixer. Mix until well combined. When the milk has cooled, strain it through a sieve into the flour, discarding the cardamom. Using a wooden spoon or dough hook, mix to form a soft dough. Tip onto a work surface and knead for 10 mins, or run the freestanding mixer for 5 mins, until the dough is smooth and stretchy. Clean the bowl, lightly grease with oil, then return the dough to the bowl and turn it over until well coated in oil. Cover the bowl with a tea towel or cling film and leave to rise for 2 hrs or until doubled in size (you could prove it in the fridge overnight).","STEP 3","Crack the remaining cardamom pods using a pestle and mortar. Prise them open and tip the seeds back into the mortar, discarding the pods. Crush the seeds to a powder, then combine with 150g sugar. In a bowl, mix the remaining butter with all but 2 tbsp of the cardamom sugar.","STEP 4","Line two baking trays with parchment. Punch the dough down to knock out the air, then roll to a rectangle roughly 35 x 45cm, with the longer edge facing you. Spread the cardamom butter over the surface, right to the edges. Fold the top third down to the middle and the bottom third up, like an envelope, so you have three layers of dough. Score, then cut into 12 equal strips, measuring about 3.5 x 11cm each. Cut each strip down the centre, leaving it attached at the top. Twist each strip away from the centre two or three times, then tie the dough in a knot and tuck the ends underneath the bun. Put each on the tray when done.","STEP 5","Cover both trays with a sheet of lightly oiled cling film and leave somewhere warm to rise for 30 mins - 1 hr, or until almost doubled in size. Heat oven to 190C/170C fan/gas 5.","STEP 6","Uncover the buns and brush all over with the beaten egg, then sprinkle with the pearl sugar. Bake for 20-25 mins until golden brown – swap the trays halfway through if they’re browning unevenly.","STEP 7","Tip the remaining cardamom sugar into a pan and add 50ml water. Bring to a boil, then remove from the heat and set aside to cool, swirling to dissolve the sugar. Brush the syrup over the buns two or three times as they cool, leave them to soak for 20 mins before eating. Will keep for 2 days in a sealed container, or freeze for 2 months. Defrost at room temperature and reheat for 5 mins in the oven before eating."]
'Chocolate fondant', ["50g melted butter, for brushing","cocoa powder, for dusting","200g good-quality dark chocolate, chopped into small pieces","200g butter, in small pieces","200g golden caster sugar","4 eggs and 4 yolks","200g plain flour","Caramel sauce (see \'Goes well with\') and vanilla ice cream or orange sorbet, to serve"], ["STEP 1","First get your moulds ready. Using upward strokes, heavily brush melted butter (use 50g in total) all over the inside of the pudding mould. Place the mould in the fridge or freezer. Brush more melted butter over the chilled butter, then add a good spoonful of cocoa powder into the mould. Tip the mould so the powder completely coats the butter. Tap any excess cocoa back into the jar, then repeat with the next mould.","STEP 2","Place a bowl over a pan of barely simmering water, then slowly melt 200g good-quality dark\xa0chocolate\xa0and 200g butter, both chopped into small pieces, together. Remove the bowl from the heat and stir until smooth. Leave to cool for about 10 mins.","STEP 3","In a separate bowl whisk 4\xa0eggs and 4 egg yolks together with 200g golden caster\xa0sugar until thick and pale and the whisk leaves a trail; use an electric whisk if you want. Sift 200g plain\xa0flour into the eggs, then beat together.","STEP 4","Pour the melted chocolate into the egg mixture in thirds, beating well between each addition, until all the chocolate is added and the mixture is completely combined to a loose cake batter.","STEP 5","Tip the fondant batter into a jug, then evenly divide between the moulds. The fondants can now be frozen for up to a month and cooked from frozen. Chill for at least 20 mins or up to the night before. To bake from frozen, simply carry on as stated, adding 5 mins more to the cooking time.","STEP 6","Heat oven to 200C/fan 180C/gas 6. Place the fondants on a baking tray, then cook for 10-12 mins until the tops have formed a crust and they are starting to come away from the sides of their moulds. Remove from the oven, then leave to sit for 1 min before turning out.","STEP 7","Loosen the fondants by moving the tops very gently so they come away from the sides, easing them out of the moulds. Tip each fondant slightly onto your hand so you know it has come away, then tip back into the mould ready to plate up.","STEP 8","Starting from the middle of each plate, squeeze a spiral of caramel sauce – do all the plates you need before you go on to the next stage.","STEP 9","Sit a fondant in the middle of each plate. Using a large spoon dipped in hot water, scoop a ‘quenelle’ of ice cream.","STEP 10","Carefully place the ice cream on top of the fondant, then serve immediately. Repeat with the rest of the fondants."]
'Best ever chocolate brownies recipe', ["185g unsalted butter","185g best dark chocolate","85g plain flour","40g cocoa powder","50g white chocolate","50g milk chocolate","3 large eggs","275g golden caster sugar"], ["STEP 1","Cut 185g unsalted butter into small cubes and tip into a\xa0medium bowl. Break 185g dark chocolate into small pieces and drop into the bowl.","STEP 2","Fill a small saucepan about a quarter full with hot water, then sit the bowl on top so it rests on the rim of the pan, not touching the water. Put over a low heat until the butter and chocolate have melted, stirring occasionally to mix them.","STEP 3","Remove the bowl from the pan. Alternatively, cover the bowl loosely with cling film and put in the microwave for 2 minutes on High. Leave the melted mixture to cool to room temperature.","STEP 4","While you wait for the chocolate to cool, position a shelf in the middle of your oven and turn the oven on to 180C/160C fan/gas 4.","STEP 5","Using a shallow 20cm square tin, cut out a square of non-stick baking parchment to line the base. Tip 85g plain flour and 40g cocoa powder into a sieve held over a medium bowl. Tap and shake the sieve so they run through together and you get rid of any lumps.","STEP 6","Chop 50g white chocolate and 50g milk chocolate into chunks on a board.","STEP 7","Break 3 large eggs into a large bowl and tip in 275g golden caster sugar. With an electric mixer on maximum speed, whisk the eggs and sugar.\xa0They will\xa0look thick and creamy, like a milk shake. This can take 3-8 minutes, depending on how powerful your mixer is. You’ll know it’s ready when the mixture becomes really pale and about double its original volume. Another check is to turn off the mixer, lift out the beaters and wiggle them from side to side. If the mixture that runs off the beaters leaves a trail on the surface of the mixture in the bowl for a second or two, you’re there.","STEP 8","Pour the cooled chocolate mixture over the eggy mousse, then gently fold together with a rubber spatula. Plunge the spatula in at one side, take it underneath and bring it up the opposite side and in again at the middle. Continue going under and over in a figure of eight, moving the bowl round after each folding so you can get at it from all sides, until the two mixtures are one and the colour is a mottled dark brown. The idea is to marry them without knocking out the air, so be as gentle and slow as you like.","STEP 9","Hold the sieve over the bowl of eggy chocolate mixture and resift the cocoa and flour mixture, shaking the sieve from side to side, to cover the top evenly.","STEP 10","Gently fold in this powder using the same figure of eight action as before. The mixture will look dry and dusty at first, and a bit unpromising, but if you keep going very gently and patiently, it will end up looking gungy and fudgy. Stop just before you feel you should, as you don’t want to overdo this mixing.","STEP 11","Finally, stir in the white and milk chocolate chunks until they’re dotted throughout.","STEP 12","Pour the mixture into the prepared tin, scraping every bit out of the bowl with the spatula. Gently ease the mixture into the corners of the tin and paddle the spatula from side to side across the top to level it.","STEP 13","Put in the oven and set your timer for 25 mins. When the buzzer goes, open the oven, pull the shelf out a bit and gently shake the tin. If the brownie wobbles in the middle, it’s not quite done, so slide it back in and bake for another 5 minutes until the top has a shiny, papery crust and the sides are just beginning to come away from the tin. Take out of the oven.","STEP 14","Leave the whole thing in the tin until completely cold, then, if you’re using the brownie tin, lift up the protruding rim slightly and slide the uncut brownie out on its base. If you’re using a normal tin, lift out the brownie with the foil. Cut into quarters, then cut each quarter into four squares and finally into triangles.","STEP 15","They’ll keep in an\xa0airtight container\xa0for a good two weeks and in the freezer for up to a month."]
'Lighter gingerbread', ["140g dried pitted whole dates preferably Medjool, chopped into small pieces","75ml rapeseed oil , plus a few drops for greasing","75g black treacle","50g maple syrup","1 tsp finely grated fresh ginger","1 large egg","175ml buttermilk","250g plain flour","1 tsp bicarbonate of soda","1 tbsp ground ginger","½ tsp ground cinnamon","50g dark muscovado sugar"], ["STEP 1","Put the dates in a small bowl and pour over 125ml of boiling water. Leave to cool for 30 mins. Lightly oil a 28 x 19 x 3cm traybake tin, then line the base with baking parchment.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, put the oil, black treacle, maple syrup and freshly grated ginger in a bowl and beat together with a fork to mix well. Set aside. Beat the egg in a small bowl and stir in the buttermilk. In a large bowl, mix the flour with the bicarbonate of soda, ground ginger, cinnamon and sugar – rub the mixture between your fingers to break down any lumpy bits of sugar. Heat oven to 160C/140C fan/gas 3.","STEP 3","Blend the dates and their liquid to a thick purée in a small food processor. Pour the egg, the dates and the treacle mixture into the bowl with the flour. Stir together briefly with a wooden spoon just until well mixed – the mixture will be soft like a thick batter. Pour it into the lined tin, gently level the mixture and bake for 40-45 mins. To test if it’s done, insert a skewer in the centre – if the skewer comes out clean with no uncooked mixture on it, and the cake feels firm but springy to the touch, it should be done.","STEP 4","Leave in the tin for a few mins before removing to a wire rack, peeling off the parchment and leaving to cool completely. If you can wait, wrap it well in parchment, then foil. Leave for a day before cutting, as it will become stickier – it will keep moist for 3-4 days."]
'Key lime pie', ["300g Hob Nobs","150g butter, melted","1 x 397g can condensed milk (we used Nestlé)","3 medium egg yolks","finely grated zest and juice of 4 limes","300ml double cream","1 tbsp icing sugar","extra  lime zest, to decorate"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 160C/fan 140C/gas 3.","STEP 2","Whizz 300g Hob Nobs to crumbs in a food processor (or put in a strong plastic bag and bash with a rolling pin).","STEP 3","Mix with 150g melted butter and press into the base and up the sides of a 22cm loose-based tart tin. Bake in the oven for 10 minutes. Remove and cool.","STEP 4","Put 3 medium egg yolks in a large bowl and whisk for a minute with electric beaters.","STEP 5","Add a can of condensed milk and whisk for 3 minutes, then add the finely grated zest and juice of 4 limes and whisk again for 3 minutes.","STEP 6","Pour the filling into the cooled base then put back in the oven for 15 minutes. Cool then chill for at least 3 hours or overnight if you like. When you are ready to serve, carefully remove the pie from the tin and put on a serving plate.","STEP 7","To decorate, softly whip together 300ml double cream and 1 tbsp icing sugar.","STEP 8","Dollop or pipe the cream onto the top of the pie and finish with extra lime zest."]
'Raspberry bakewell cake', ["140g ground almond","140g butter, softened","140g golden caster sugar","140g self-raising flour","2 eggs","1 tsp vanilla extract","250g raspberry","2 tbsp flaked almond","icing sugar, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4 and base-line and grease a deep 20cm loose-bottomed cake tin. Blitz the ground almonds, butter, sugar, flour, eggs and vanilla extract in a food processor until well combined.","STEP 2","Spread half the mix over the cake tin and smooth over the top. Scatter the raspberries over, then dollop the remaining cake mixture on top and roughly spread – you might find this easier to do with your fingers. Scatter with flaked almonds and bake for 50 mins until golden. Cool, remove from the tin and dust with icing sugar to serve."]
'Dorset apple traybake', ["225g butter, softened, plus extra for the tin","450g cooking apples  (such as Bramley)","½ lemon, juiced","280g golden caster sugar","4 eggs","2 tsp  vanilla extract","350g self-raising flour","2 tsp  baking powder","demerara sugar, to sprinkle"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Butter and line a rectangular baking tin (approx 27 x 20cm) with\xa0 baking parchment. Peel, core and thinly slice the apples, then squeeze over the lemon juice. Set aside.","STEP 2","Put the butter, caster sugar, eggs, vanilla, flour and baking powder into a large bowl and mix well until smooth. Spread half the mixture into the prepared tin. Arrange half the apples over the top of the mixture, then repeat the layers. Sprinkle over the demerara sugar.","STEP 3","Bake for 45-50 mins until golden and springy to the touch. Leave to cool for 10 mins, then turn out of the tin and remove the paper. Cut into bars or squares."]
'Easy vanilla cake', ["250g pack unsalted butter, softened, plus extra for greasing","250g golden caster sugar","seeds scraped from 1 vanilla pod or 1 tsp vanilla paste","5 large eggs, cracked into a jug","85g plain flour","100g full-fat Greek yogurt (I used Total)","250g self-raising flour","3 tbsp semi-skimmed milk","50g golden caster sugar","seeds ½ vanilla pod or ½ tsp vanilla paste"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 160C/140C fan/gas 3. Grease a round, deep 20cm tin, then line the base and sides with non-stick baking paper.","STEP 2","Using electric beaters or a tabletop mixer, beat the butter, sugar, vanilla and ¼ tsp salt together until pale and fluffy, then pour in the eggs, one at a time, giving the mix a really good beating before adding the next.","STEP 3","Add 1 tbsp of the plain flour if the mix starts to look slimy rather than fluffy. Beat in the yogurt.\xa0Mix the flours; then, using a large metal spoon, fold them into the batter, followed by the milk.","STEP 4","Spoon the mix into the tin and bake for 1 hr 20 mins or until well risen and golden – a skewer inserted into the middle should come out clean.","STEP 5","Meanwhile, make the syrup by gently heating 50ml water with the sugar and vanilla in a pan until the sugar dissolves. Set aside. Once the cake is out of the oven, leave to cool for 30 mins in the tin, then use a skewer to poke holes all over the cake, going right to the bottom. Pour the syrup over, letting it completely soak in after each addition.","STEP 6","Leave to cool completely, then either wrap the cake well or fill and ice it. If you wrap it with baking parchment and cling film, the unfilled cake will keep well for up to 3 days, or in the freezer for up to a month.","STEP 7","For ideas on how to decorate the cake and to try out some variations on this basic cake mixture, have a look at the \'Goes well with\' recipes for Simple elegance wedding cake, Birthday bug cake and Summer celebration cake."]
'Chocolate brownie cake', ["100g butter","125g caster sugar","75g light brown or muscovado sugar","125g plain chocolate (plain or milk)","1 tbsp golden syrup","2 eggs","1 tsp vanilla extract/essence","100g plain flour","½ tsp baking powder","2 tbsp cocoa powder"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/fan 160C/gas 4. Grease and line a 20cm cake tin.","STEP 2","Place the butter, caster sugar, brown sugar, chocolate and golden syrup in the pan and melt gently on a low heat until it is smooth and lump-free.","STEP 3","Remove the pan from the heat.","STEP 4","Break the eggs into the bowl and whisk with the fork until light and frothy. 5 Add the eggs, vanilla extract or essence, flour, baking powder and cocoa powder to the chocolate mixture and mix thoroughly.","STEP 5","Put the mixture into the greased and lined cake tin and place on the middle shelf of the oven. Bake for 25-30 mins.","STEP 6","Remove and allow to cool for 20-30 mins before cutting into wedges and serving.","STEP 7","Serve with cream or ice cream and plenty of fresh fruit."]
'Amarena cherry & almond tart', ["125g butter","125g golden caster sugar","225g plain flour","½ egg or 1 egg yolk","125g butter , at room temperature","125g golden caster sugar","3 medium eggs","1 lemon , zested","125g finely ground almonds or almond flour","120g Fabbri amarena cherries (see tip)","icing sugar , for dusting (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Mix together the butter, sugar, flour, a pinch of salt and the egg in a food processor to make a dough, then wrap and leave to rest in the fridge for 30 mins. The dough should be cold but still easy to work with by the time you roll it out.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, make the frangipane filling. Melt the butter in a pan over a low heat, then set aside to cool slightly. Beat the sugar with the eggs and lemon zest in a bowl until creamy. Pour in the melted butter while continuing to beat, then add the ground almonds (or almond flour) and fold into the mixture. Heat oven to 175C/155C fan/gas 3½.","STEP 3","Line a buttered tart tin or ring mould (approximately 23cm) with the rolled-out pastry dough, then trim any overhanging edges. Spread the frangipane evenly into the tin and arrange the cherries on top with some of their syrup, so the top of the tart is covered in a thin layer.","STEP 4","Put the tart in the oven and bake for about 40-45 mins until golden brown, puffed and firm to the touch. Leave to cool on a rack. Dust with some icing sugar, if you like, before serving in slices."]
'Easy chocolate biscuits', ["250g butter, softened","350g light soft brown sugar","2 large eggs","350g self-raising flour","100g cocoa powder","200g chocolate chips or chopped chocolate chunks, or 400g for optional dipping (choose your favourite type)"], ["STEP 1","Beat the butter and sugar together with an optional pinch of sea salt in a bowl until light and fluffy, then beat in the eggs one at a time. Sift over the flour and cocoa powder and beat into the butter mix, then fold through the chocolate chips. The mix can be made up to 2 days ahead and chilled or frozen for a month, or used straight away.","STEP 2","To bake, heat oven to 190C/170C fan/gas 5. If the mix is at room temperature, place evenly spaced\xa0spoonfuls\xa0on parchment-lined baking sheets, allowing 2 tbsp for each cookie. If the mix is fridge cold, you can roll it into 40g balls before baking. The balls can be frozen and the biscuits baked from frozen, but they’ll need a few minutes more.\xa0Bake for 12-15 mins until spread out and crusty around the outside.\xa0Leave to cool slightly and enjoy warm, or leave to cool completely and eat cold. The biscuits will keep in a tin for three days.","STEP 3","As an optional extra, the biscuits can be dipped in chocolate. To do this, melt your chosen type of chocolate in a bowl over a pan of simmering water or in the microwave. Leave to cool a little, then dip half of each biscuit in the chocolate and leave them on parchment-lined trays somewhere cool to set. Again, the dipped biscuits will keep for up to three days in a tin or lidded plastic container."]
'Black tahini chocolate cookies', ["50g salted butter , softened","125g light brown muscovado sugar","125g golden caster sugar","1 egg , beaten","200g self-raising flour","2 tbsp cocoa powder","200g milk chocolate , broken into chunks","100g white chocolate , melted, for drizzling","100g black sesame seeds (available at Waitrose), plus extra for decorating","100g flavourless oil","30g maple syrup"], ["STEP 1","First, make the black tahini. Toast the sesame seeds in a small pan over a gentle heat until you can smell the sesame aroma. Transfer to a mini processor and blitz. Pour in the oil gradually until a paste forms. Add the maple syrup and blitz again. Tip into a small bowl until ready to use.","STEP 2","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4 and line two baking sheets with parchment. In a large bowl, beat the butter and sugars together until pale and fluffy. Add the egg and 80g of black tahini paste, and beat to combine. Tip in the flour, cocoa and milk chocolate chunks, and beat until fully incorporated.","STEP 3","Using an ice cream scoop, ball the dough into about 20 pieces and place on the baking sheets. Press each ball lightly so it’s a little flatter, leaving plenty of room between them, as they will spread.","STEP 4","Bake for 6-8 mins until still soft in the middle – they will harden as they cool. Leave to cool on the sheets for a few mins before transferring to wire racks to cool completely.","STEP 5","Once cooled, drizzle white chocolate zigzags all over the cookies and sprinkle some black sesame seeds on top. Will keep in an airtight container for 3 days."]
'Pistachio & milk chocolate squares', ["140g shelled pistachios","200g milk chocolate , broken into chunks","200g golden caster sugar","200g very soft butter","3 eggs","200g self-raising flour","100ml milk","150ml soured cream"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Line a 20cm square cake tin with baking parchment. Whizz 125g of the pistachios, 75g of the chocolate and about half the sugar in a food processor until very finely chopped. Tip into a bowl with remaining sugar, butter, eggs, flour and milk, plus a pinch of salt, and beat. Scrape into the tin and bake for 35-45 mins until a skewer poked in comes out clean. Cool.","STEP 2","Melt the remaining milk chocolate, stir in the soured cream and cool until spreadable. Trim the edges off the cake, then split in half. Spread a little icing over the base, sandwich the top of sponge back on. Spread remaining icing over the top, roughly chop the remaining pistachios and scatter them over. Cut into 16 squares to serve."]
'Courgette & mushroom bread', ["3 medium courgettes , grated","2 tsp salt","2 tbsp olive oil","1 small onion , finely chopped","2 garlic  cloves, crushed","100g chestnut mushroom , chopped","350g strong plain flour","7g sachet easy-blend dried yeast","2 tbsp chopped fresh basil","½ tbsp  coarse sea salt , to sprinkle"], ["STEP 1","Put the grated courgettes in a colander and sprinkle with 1 tsp of the salt. Leave to stand for 20 mins, then, using your hands, squeeze out as much of the moisture as possible. Rinse the courgettes thoroughly, then squeeze again.","STEP 2","Heat 1 tbsp of the olive oil in a frying pan and cook the onion and garlic for 4 mins until softened. Add the mushrooms and cook for a further 4 mins until softened and browned, then add the courgettes and cook for another 2 mins. Strain well and set aside to cool; discard the liquid.","STEP 3","Heat oven to 220C/fan 200C/gas 7. Place the flour in a large mixing bowl, stir in the yeast, the remaining oil and salt, the basil and the courgette mixture. Mix well to combine. Make a well in the centre and add 125ml hand-hot water. Mix well to form a slightly sticky dough. Knead on a floured surface for about 10 mins, then shape into a ball and place on a greased baking sheet.","STEP 4","Flatten the ball of dough very slightly with the palm of your hand and loosely cover with oiled cling film. Leave to rise in a warm place for 25-30 mins until doubled in size. Brush the top of the dough with a little water, then sprinkle with the sea salt and bake for 40 mins until golden. Leave to cool on a wire rack before serving."]
'Tropical upside-down cake', ["80g unsalted butter , softened, plus extra for the tin","50g light brown soft sugar","8 canned pineapple rings in syrup (syrup reserved)","7 maraschino cherries","2-3 tbsp coconut rum (optional)","2-3 tbsp coconut flakes , toasted","whipped cream or coconut yogurt, to serve","150g unsalted butter , softened","150g golden caster sugar","150g self-raising flour","50g desiccated coconut","4 limes , zested, 1 juiced","2 large eggs"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Butter a 20cm square or 22cm round cake tin. Beat 50g of the butter with the brown sugar, then spread into the base and halfway up the sides of the prepared tin. Cut one of the pineapple rings into quarters, then arrange the whole rings in the tin, putting a cherry in the centre of each. Put a pineapple ring quarter into each corner.","STEP 2","To make the sponge, tip the butter, sugar, flour, desiccated coconut, ½ tsp fine sea salt, most of the lime zest and the eggs into a large bowl. Beat together using an electric whisk until smooth and creamy. Spoon the batter over the pineapple and level with the back of a spoon. Bake for 35-40 mins. Leave to cool in the tin for 5 mins, then turn out onto a cake board or serving plate.","STEP 3","Bring the reserved pineapple syrup to the boil in a medium pan, then stir in the coconut rum (if using), remaining butter and the lime juice. Leave to cool slightly. Drizzle over the cake, then scatter over the coconut flakes and remaining lime zest. Serve with whipped cream or coconut yogurt, if you like. Will keep in an airtight container for up to five days."]
'No-cook chocolate tart', ["200g pack all-butter biscuit","100g butter","1 tbsp golden syrup or honey","100g bar dark chocolate","100g bar milk chocolate","1 tsp vanilla extract","2 tbsp icing sugar, plus extra for dusting","200ml whipping cream","3 tbsp crème fraîche, to decorate","200g raspberry, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Crush the biscuits by putting them in a large, strong, plastic food bag and bashing with a rolling pin. Melt the butter with the syrup or honey in the microwave, then stir in the biscuits. Press onto the base and up the sides of a 12 x 36cm rectangular tin (or 23-25cm round flan tin) and chill while you make the filling.","STEP 2","Break up the two chocolate bars and put in a large bowl. Melt in the microwave for 2-3 mins on Medium, stirring halfway through. Stir in the vanilla extract, then sift in the icing sugar. Whip the cream until it just holds its shape, then fold into the melted chocolate. Pour into the prepared tin and smooth the top. Chill for at least 2 hrs or for up to 2 days.","STEP 3","Just before serving, remove the tart from the tin and slide it onto a flat plate (loosen edges first with the tip of a small pointed knife). You will find it easier to remove the tart if you leave it at room temperature for 30 mins. Put a few tsps of crème fraîche along the centre of the tart (or around the edges if the tart is circular) and top each with a raspberry, then dust lightly with icing sugar. Cut into thin slices and serve with extra raspberries on the side."]
'Rhubarb & custard sandwich biscuits', ["175g unsalted butter , cubed","50g caster sugar","50g icing sugar","¼ tsp fine sea salt","250g plain flour , plus extra for dusting","50g custard powder","2 egg yolks","1 tbsp vanilla bean paste","200g rhubarb , trimmed and chopped","200g caster sugar","¼ lemon , juiced"], ["STEP 1","To make the jam, put the rhubarb, sugar and lemon juice in a pan over a medium heat. Bring to a simmer and cook for 15 mins, or until the rhubarb has broken down and released its liquid. Blitz using a hand blender until smooth, then simmer for another 5-10 mins until thick and jammy. To test it’s ready, run a wooden spoon over the base of the pan – it should leave a trail rather than filling in straightaway. Leave to cool (it will set more as it does), then chill until ready to use. Will keep in a sealed container or jar in the fridge for up to one week.","STEP 2","To make the biscuit dough, put the butter, both sugars and salt in a food processor and pulse a few times to a coarse paste. Scrape down the sides, then add the flour and custard powder and pulse again to a damp, sandy consistency. Add the egg yolks and vanilla and pulse again until the dough comes together into a ball. Add ½-1 tbsp water to bring it together, if needed. Tip the dough out, then wrap and put in the fridge to chill for at least 30 mins.","STEP 3","Roll the dough out on a floured surface to a 5mm thickness. Stamp out as many biscuits as you can using a 6mm round cutter – you should get about 32 in total.","STEP 4","Cut circles or hearts out of the centres of half the biscuits using the wide end of a plain piping nozzle (about 1.5cm), or a small heart cutter. Transfer all the biscuits to lined baking sheets, then transfer to the fridge and chill for 15 mins. You can also cook the cut-out shapes to make mini biscuits – if doing so, put these on their own baking sheet.","STEP 5","Heat the oven to 200C/180C fan/ gas 6, then bake the biscuits for 8-10 mins until golden (5-6 mins for the mini biscuits). Put on a wire rack and leave to cool completely.","STEP 6","Transfer the jam to a piping bag, snip off the end, and pipe a small layer of jam onto the plain biscuits (those without the centres cut out). Or, use a teaspoon. Spread the jam out – it may squidge out of the sides when sandwiching the biscuits, so don’t go too far to the edge.","STEP 7","Sandwich the remaining biscuits over the jam (don’t press down too firmly), then transfer to an airtight container in a single layer and leave to set overnight. This ensures the jam won’t leak when you bite into them, but they can be eaten straightaway if you can’t resist. Will keep in an airtight container for up to three days, but the biscuits will start to soften over time."]
'Chocolate traybake', ["185ml vegetable oil , plus extra for the tin","250g plain flour","80g cocoa powder","2½ tsp baking powder","1 tsp bicarbonate of soda","325g light brown soft sugar","250ml buttermilk","125ml strong coffee  or espresso, (can be warm, but not hot)","2 tsp vanilla extract","2 large eggs","150g salted butter , softened","200g icing sugar","4 tbsp cocoa powder","2 tbsp milk","sprinkles , sweets, chocolate shavings or nuts, to decorate"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Oil and line the base and sides of a 33cm x 23cm roasting tin or cake tin with a lip of at least 2½ cm. Combine the flour, cocoa powder, baking powder, bicarb, sugar and a good pinch of salt in a large bowl. Rub any lumps of sugar between your fingers, shaking the bowl a few times to bring them to the surface.","STEP 2","Whisk the oil, buttermilk, coffee, vanilla and eggs in a jug, then pour the wet ingredients into the dry. Use a spatula to stir well, removing any pockets of flour. Pour the mixture into the lined tin and bake for 25-30 mins until a skewer inserted into the centre comes out clean. If any wet cake mixture clings to the skewer, return the cake to the oven for 5 mins, then check again. Once cooked, remove from the oven and leave to cool in the tin for at least 20 mins.","STEP 3","Meanwhile, make the icing. Melt the butter in a saucepan, then remove from the heat and stir in the icing sugar, cocoa powder and milk. The icing will be very runny but will thicken a little as it cools. (If the icing has set too much before the cake has cooled, reheat it slightly to make it easier to pour.)","STEP 4","Pour the icing over the cake and leave to set. Decorate with the sweets, sprinkles, chocolate shavings or nuts, then cut into squares and dig in."]
'Anzac biscuits', ["85g porridge oat","85g desiccated coconut","100g plain flour","100g caster sugar","100g butter, plus extra butter for greasing","1 tbsp golden syrup","1 tsp bicarbonate of soda"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/fan 160C/gas 4. Put the oats, coconut, flour and sugar in a bowl. Melt the butter in a small pan and stir in the golden syrup. Add the bicarbonate of soda to 2 tbsp boiling water, then stir into the golden syrup and butter mixture.","STEP 2","Make a well in the middle of the dry ingredients and pour in the butter and golden syrup mixture. Stir gently to incorporate the dry ingredients.","STEP 3","Put dessertspoonfuls of the mixture on to buttered baking sheets, about 2.5cm/1in apart to allow room for spreading. Bake in batches for 8-10 mins until golden. Transfer to a wire rack to cool."]
'Hazelnut latte cake', ["100g unsalted butter , plus extra for greasing","100g bag chopped toasted hazelnuts","300g light brown soft sugar","6 tbsp semi-skimmed milk","1 tsp fine instant coffee powder (see tip)","6 large eggs , at room temperature","2 tbsp cornflour","175g plain flour","50g light brown soft sugar","1 tsp fine instant coffee powder","1 tbsp Frangelico (hazelnut) liqueur, or use Kahlua or Tia Maria","400g mascarpone","300g hazelnut chocolate spread (Nutella has the best texture for this)","1 tbsp fine instant coffee powder","50g chopped toasted hazelnuts","150ml pot double cream","4 tsp icing sugar","3 tbsp semi-skimmed milk","1 tbsp fine instant coffee powder, dissolved in 1 tsp boiling water"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Generously butter two 20cm sandwich tins (ideally about 4.5cm deep or deeper) and line the bases with baking parchment. Put the hazelnuts into a food processor with 2 tbsp of the sugar, then pulse until finely chopped. Don’t expect them to go as fine as ground almonds and avoid over-processing, as this can make the nuts greasy.","STEP 2","Put the butter, milk and coffee powder into a small pan and heat gently until the butter has melted. Set aside.","STEP 3","Now start the sponge. Crack the eggs into the bowl of a tabletop mixer, add the rest of the sugar and beat for 5-10 mins (or beat with an electric hand mixer in a large deep bowl for 15-20 mins) or until thick and billowy, and the mixture leaves a trail that holds for a couple of seconds. It is really important that the mixture has thickened, almost doubling in size, in order to achieve a light sponge.","STEP 4","Mix the cornflour, plain flour and 1/2 tsp salt, and sift onto the whisked mixture. Using a large metal spoon, fold in very carefully. Sprinkle in the ground nuts, then fold these in too. Pour the warm milk mix around the edge of the bowl, and fold this in. Don’t rush the folding, and continue with a light lifting and cutting motion until ribbons of liquid stop appearing. Divide the batter between the tins, then bake for 25 mins until risen to the middle and a burnished gold.","STEP 5","Loosen the sides of the cakes with a palette knife, then cool in the tins on a rack for 20 mins (the cakes will level off, and possibly go a bit wrinkly, but that’s normal). Carefully remove from the tins and cool, paper-side down.","STEP 6","Make the syrup and the frosting while you wait. Put the sugar and 4 tbsp water into a small pan. Bring to the boil and leave for 1 min then take off the heat. Stir in the coffee and alcohol. Beat the mascarpone, hazelnut chocolate spread and coffee together with a wooden spoon, until silky and even.","STEP 7","To assemble, cut the cold cakes horizontally across the middle, using a long serrated knife. With a pastry brush, dampen the cut surfaces all over with the syrup. Use it all. Put one cake layer onto a plate or stand, cut-side up. Spoon on 3 generous dollops of the frosting, then spread to the edges with a palette knife. The frosting should be about 5mm deep. Repeat with the next two layers. When you come to the final layer, place it cut-side down, so that the top of the cake is smooth. Paddle the rest of the frosting over the top and sides of the cake. The layer on the top can be thin. Clean the knife then use it to press a neat ring of nuts into the frosting on the side of the cake. Brush any excess away.","STEP 8","For the topping, put 3 tbsp of the cream, 1 tsp icing sugar and 1 tbsp milk into a small bowl. Put the rest of the cream, milk and sugar, plus most of the dissolved coffee into a larger bowl. Whip the white cream, then the coffee cream, until they look like soft cappuccino froth, thick but still able to flow from a spoon. Pour most of the coffee cream onto the cake and push it out to cover the top. Whisk a little more coffee into what is left, so that it turns a few shades darker.","STEP 9","To decorate with a characteristic latte ‘tree’ shape, load a pointy teaspoon with a little of the white cream. Start at the base of the tree, just right of the centre of the cake. Push the spoon into the coffee cream and let the white cream flow slowly. As it flows, drag the spoon then pull it gently away, to make a leaf-like shape. Repeat with more white cream on the left to make another leaf, then repeat 3-4 times, working up the cake top graduating from large to small leaves. Use the same technique to sweep a couple of arc shapes around the edge of the pattern.","STEP 10","Use the dark cream to add detail to each leaf – you can paint this on with the tip of a teaspoon or a clean cocktail stick. Use a cocktail stick to drag the points of each leaf up and outwards. Draw a line down from the top of the ‘tree’ to the bottom to finish. The cake will keep for up to 2 days. Loosely cover any cut edges but avoid covering the cake directly as you could damage the decoration. Serve from the fridge or at cool room temperature."]
'Spiced honey drizzle cake', ["100g salted butter , plus extra for the tin","100g light brown soft sugar","100g runny honey","1 large egg","100ml milk","1 tsp mixed spice","½ tsp ground  ginger","150g self-raising flour","25g salted butter","25g runny honey"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Butter and line a 900g loaf tin with baking parchment. Beat the butter and sugar with an electric whisk until creamy. Whisk in the honey, egg, milk, spices and a pinch of salt (don’t worry if it curdles slightly, it will become a loose batter), then fold in the flour.","STEP 2","Tip into the prepared loaf tin and bake for 45 mins until a skewer inserted in the middle comes out clean. Leave the cake to cool for 10 mins, then transfer to a wire rack to cool completely.","STEP 3","For the glaze, melt the butter and honey in a small pan until smooth. Leave to cool until thickened, then drizzle over the top of the cooled cake. Leave to set before serving."]
'Almond & raspberry cruffins', ["1 tsp fast-action dried yeast","1 tsp lemon juice","225g strong white flour , sifted, plus extra for shaping","25g golden caster sugar","140g cold unsalted butter , chopped into sugar-cube-sized pieces","50g unsalted butter","50g golden caster sugar","50g ground almonds","1 tsp plain flour","a few drops almond extract","1 egg yolk","a few tbsp seedless raspberry jam","icing sugar , to dust"], ["STEP 1","For the pastry, measure 75ml just-warm water, add the yeast and stir it to dissolve. Measure another 75ml ice-cold water and add the lemon juice to it. Mix the flour and sugar with 1/2 tsp fine salt in a large bowl, then toss in the cubes of butter until coated in the flour. Splash the yeast water and lemon water over the contents of the bowl. Using a round-bladed knife, work quickly to bring the mix to a rough dough with lumps of butter held inside it.","STEP 2","Turn onto a floured work surface, shape into a squat rectangle without kneading it too much, then wrap in cling film and chill for 15 mins in the freezer.","STEP 3","Dust the work surface and pastry with flour. Roll the pastry in one direction until it’s 3 times long as it is wide, or about 45 x 15cm. Try to keep the sides straight as you roll, and the top and bottom edges as square as possible.","STEP 4","Fold the pastry over itself. Fold the bottom third up, then the top third down, to make a neat block. Turn the block so that its open edge is facing to the right, like a book. Press the edges together gently with the rolling pin. Roll out and fold the pastry like this 3 more times to make a smooth dough, with the odd streak of butter here and there. If it feels greasy at any point, or becomes springy, cover and chill for 10 mins before continuing. Wrap the finished dough and chill for at least 1 hr.","STEP 5","To make the filling, beat together all the ingredients and season with a pinch of salt. Set aside until needed.","STEP 6","To shape, put the dough on a floured work surface. Cut it in half across the middle and return one half to the fridge. Roll the other to a 30 x 20cm rectangle, then cut this into 3 strips, each 10cm wide. To create even more layers, fold each piece in half lengthways. Put a generous teaspoon of the almond mix at one end of the pastry, then roll the pastry around it in a spiral. Place, cut-edge up, into a non-stick muffin tin. Repeat to make 6 cruffins. Loosely cover with cling film. Can be chilled overnight. (You may have some filling left over, which can be frozen.)","STEP 7","Prove the dough at a cool room temperature for 2 hrs or until the pastry has filled the wells of the tin. Heat oven to 190C/170C fan/gas 5. Bake the cruffins for 20-25 mins until risen and deep golden brown. Remove and cool a little on a rack. To fill with jam, spoon the jam into a piping bag fitted with a 5mm nozzle, or use a chef’s squeezy bottle. Push the nozzle into the middle of the cruffin and squeeze. Dust the cruffins with icing sugar and eat cool or warm on the day of baking."]
'Banbury cakes', ["50g unsalted butter , softened","1 tbsp English honey","½ tsp freshly grated nutmeg","½ tsp ground cinnamon","100g currants","50g candied orange peel","plain flour , for dusting","500g pack all-butter puff pastry","1 egg white , beaten","1-2 tbsp nibbed sugar or crushed rough-edged sugar cubes"], ["STEP 1","Cream the butter and honey together with the spices. Add the currants and the candied peel and mix well. On a lightly floured surface roll out the pastry to the thickness of a £1 coin and cut out 10 x 10cm circles, re-rolling any trimmings. Divide the filling between the circles.","STEP 2","Bring up the edges of the pastry to enclose the filling and crimp the edges of the pastry together to look like little purses. Turn the parcels over, with the folds underneath. Roll each parcel out gently to an oval shape, taking care not to expose the filling.","STEP 3","Heat the oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Place the cakes on a baking sheet lined with non-stick paper. Brush with the egg white and sprinkle with sugar. Cook for 25-30 mins until cooked and crispy. Turn the oven down if the tops brown too quickly.","STEP 4","When cooked, transfer to a wire rack and allow to cool a little before eating. When cold, they’re excellent spread with a little salted butter."]
'Baked mincemeat doughnuts', ["200g strong white bread flour","1 rounded tbsp caster sugar","25g butter , cut into small pieces","1 x 7g sachet easy-blend dried yeast","5 tbsp milk","1 egg , beaten","4 tbsp mincemeat","3 tbsp icing sugar","85g caster sugar","1 tsp cinnamon"], ["STEP 1","Tip the flour, sugar and a good pinch of salt into a large bowl. Add the butter and rub into the flour with your fingertips. Stir in the yeast.","STEP 2","Warm the milk to hand hot. Make a well in the centre of the flour and add the milk and egg. Mix everything together to make a soft dough. Tip onto a lightly floured surface and knead for 5 mins until the dough is smooth, elastic and no longer sticky. Put the dough back in the bowl, cover with a tea towel and leave to rise for about 1 hr or until doubled in size.","STEP 3","Knead the dough again briefly, then divide into 12 equal pieces. Roll out each piece to a 9cm round and put 1 tsp mincemeat in the centre. Gather up the edges of the dough to enclose the filling, pinching it well to seal. Shape into a ball between your hands and put on a baking sheet lined with baking paper, sealed side down, allowing space for the dough to rise. Cover with a tea towel and leave for about 30 mins. Heat the oven to 190C/170C fan/gas 5.","STEP 4","Bake the doughnuts for 10-12 mins until risen and golden. Mix the icing sugar with 2 tbsp cold water in a shallow bowl. Mix the caster sugar and cinnamon in another bowl. Roll each doughnut first in the sugar syrup, then into the caster sugar to coat all over. Leave to cool."]
'Bakewell tart', ["250g plain flour , plus extra for rolling out","¼ tsp fine  sea salt","2 tbsp icing sugar","140g cold  butter , cubed","2 egg yolks , beaten","cream or custard , to serve (optional)","100g salted  butter , softened","100g caster sugar","50g ground  almonds","1 tsp almond extract","2 medium eggs , beaten","3 tbsp raspberry jam","50g flaked  almonds","80g icing sugar"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. To make the pastry, put the flour in a food processor along with the salt and icing sugar. Blitz to combine. Add the butter and pulse in short bursts until it\'s the\xa0texture of fine breadcrumbs. Mix 4 tbsp cold water with the beaten eggs and drizzle into the mixture,\xa0then quickly pulse to combine. Tip out the crumbly mixture onto a work surface, then form into a puck, cover and chill for 30 mins.","STEP 2","Roll the pastry out on a lightly floured surface to around 25cm, and to the thickness of a £1 coin. Line a 20cm fluted tart tin with the pastry, leaving the pastry to overhang. Add a large disc of baking parchment\xa0big enough to cover the edges, and some baking beans to weigh it down (use\xa0dried rice or lentils if you don’t have baking beans). Bake for 15 mins, then remove the parchment\xa0and beans and bake for a further 7-10 mins or until the bottom is evenly cooked. Trim off any overhanging pastry with a serrated knife.","STEP 3","For the filling, beat the butter and sugar until combined. Add the ground almonds, almond extract and\xa0eggs and beat for a further minute. Spread the jam over the pastry, then top with the almond filling. Scatter over the flaked almonds and bake for 25-30 mins until golden and firm. Leave to cool in the tin (or eat warm at this stage and leave out step 4).","STEP 4","Mix together the icing sugar and 1-2 tsp water and drizzle over the tart. Slice\xa0and serve with cream or custard, if you like."]
'Millionaire’s chocolate tart', ["375g pack dessert shortcrust pastry","1 tsp vanilla paste or extract","flour , for dusting","250g/9oz caramel (we used Carnation caramel from a can)","100g 70% plain chocolate , broken into pieces","100g white chocolate , broken into pieces","6 tbsp melted butter","2 eggs , plus 3 egg yolks","4 tbsp golden caster sugar","icing sugar and single cream, to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Break the pastry into chunks and drop into a food processor. Drizzle over the vanilla paste and pulse until the vanilla is speckled through the pastry (the extract should be completely absorbed). Tip out onto a floured surface, bring together into a ball, then roll out to line a 23cm tart tin (leave any overhanging pastry as you will trim this away when the tart is baked). Chill for 30 mins.","STEP 2","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Line the pastry with greaseproof paper. Fill with baking beans, bake blind for 15-20 mins, then remove the paper and beans and bake for 5-10 mins more until pale golden. Carefully spread caramel over the base and set aside while you make the filling. Lower oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4.","STEP 3","Melt the chocolates in a bowl over a pan of barely simmering water, then stir in the melted butter. Whisk the eggs, yolks and sugar together with an electric whisk in a large mixing bowl for 10 mins, until pale and thick enough to leave a trail when the beaters are lifted up. Fold in the melted chocolate with a large metal spoon, then scrape into the tin.","STEP 4","Bake for 20-25 mins – the surface should be set and puffed but still with a slight wobble. Cool, then chill for at least 3 hrs or overnight, before dusting with icing sugar and serving."]
'Custard tart with nutmeg pastry', ["500g pack shortcrust pastry","1 whole nutmeg , for grating","4 large eggs","140g golden caster sugar","300ml double cream","300ml whole milk","1 vanilla pod , seeds scraped out"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Roll the pastry out to about 1cm thick, then grate over a dusting of nutmeg using a fine grater. Fold the dough in half, then roll out again, to the thickness of 2 x £1 coins and large enough to line a 20cm loose-bottomed sandwich tin with some overhang. Press the pastry into the tin (leaving the excess draped over the sides), put onto a baking sheet and chill for 10 mins. Line the pastry with baking parchment and fill with baking beans. Bake for 20 mins, then remove beans and paper. Bake for another 15 mins until golden and sandy all over. Trim the edges of the tart with a sharp serrated knife.","STEP 2","Turn oven down to 150C/130C fan/ gas 2. Whisk together the eggs and sugar in a large bowl. Put the cream, milk, vanilla pod and seeds into a saucepan and bring to the boil. Pour onto the eggs, whisking as you go. Sieve into a jug. Put the baking sheet onto the pulled-out oven rack, then pour in the custard, right to the top. You may not need every last drop. Grate over a nice layer of nutmeg, then slide gently back into the oven and bake for 1 hr. When it’s ready, the tart should be set and pale golden on the top, and have just the merest tremor in the centre when you jiggle the tray. Cool completely, then serve in slices."]
'Brilliant banana loaf', ["140g butter, softened, plus extra for the tin","140g caster sugar","2 large eggs, beaten","140g self-raising flour","1 tsp baking powder","2 very ripe  bananas, mashed","50g icing sugar","handful dried banana chips, for decoration"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4.","STEP 2","Butter a 2lb loaf tin and line the base and sides with baking parchment.","STEP 3","Cream 140g softened butter and 140g caster sugar until light and fluffy, then slowly add 2 beaten large eggs with a little of the 140g flour.","STEP 4","Fold in the remaining flour, 1 tsp baking powder and 2 mashed bananas.","STEP 5","Pour the mixture into the prepared tin and bake for about 50\xa0mins, or until cooked through. Check the loaf at 5-min intervals by testing it with a skewer (it should be able to be inserted and removed cleanly), as the time may vary depending on the shape of your loaf tin.","STEP 6","Cool in the tin for 10 mins, then remove to a\xa0wire rack.","STEP 7","Mix 50g icing sugar with 2-3 tsp water to make a runny icing.","STEP 8","Drizzle the icing\xa0across the top of the cake and decorate with a handful of banana chips."]
'Carrot cake', ["175g light muscovado sugar","175ml sunflower oil","3 large eggs, lightly beaten","140g grated carrot (about 3 medium)","100g raisins","1 large orange, zested","175g self-raising flour","1 tsp bicarbonate of soda","1 tsp ground cinnamon","½ tsp grated nutmeg (freshly grated will give you the best flavour)","175g icing sugar","1½-2 tbsp orange juice"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Oil and line the base and sides of an 18cm square cake tin with baking parchment.","STEP 2","Tip the sugar, sunflower oil and eggs into a big mixing bowl. Lightly mix with a wooden spoon. Stir in the carrots, raisins and orange zest.","STEP 3","Sift the flour, bicarbonate of soda, cinnamon and nutmeg into the bowl. Mix everything together, the mixture will be soft and almost runny.","STEP 4","Pour the mixture into the prepared tin and bake for 40-45 mins or until it feels firm and springy when you press it in the centre.","STEP 5","Cool in the tin for 5 mins, then turn it out, peel off the paper and cool on a wire rack. (You can freeze the cake at this point\xa0if you want to serve it at a later date.)","STEP 6","Beat the icing sugar and orange juice in a small bowl until smooth – you want the icing about as runny as single cream. Put the cake on a serving plate and boldly drizzle the icing back and forth in diagonal lines over the top, letting it drip down the sides."]
'Eve’s pudding', ["6 large Bramley apples, finely sliced","200g unsalted butter","140g raisins","100g soft brown sugar","4 eggs","200g self-raising flour"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Peel, core and slice the apples. Grease a large serving dish, about 2.5 litre/3 litre with 25g/1oz of the butter and tip in the apple. Scatter the raisins over the top.","STEP 2","In a separate dish beat the remaining butter and sugar together for 10 mins until the butter turns pale and the sugar starts to dissolve. Beat in the eggs, then carefully fold in the flour with a large spoon. Spread the batter over the apples, then bake for 45 mins until golden. Serve with the custard, below."]
'Iced buns with cream & jam', ["350ml milk , plus extra for brushing","30g butter , cubed","500g strong white bread flour","10g fast-action dried yeast","2 tbsp caster sugar","300g icing sugar , plus 1 tbsp","few drops of yellow, pink and purple food colouring (optional)","300ml whipping or double cream","200g lemon curd","200g raspberry jam","200g blackcurrant jam","glacé cherries , sprinkles or crystallised rose and violet petals, to decorate (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat the milk until steaming. Add the butter and swirl until melted. Leave to cool slightly. Tip the flour and yeast into a bowl or stand mixer fitted with a dough hook, then add the caster sugar and ½ tsp salt.","STEP 2","When the milk mix has cooled slightly (it should feel just warm when you stick a finger in) pour into the flour mix. If using a stand mixer, mix for 5-8 mins on a medium speed until springy. Or, knead in the bowl for about 10 mins – when the dough is pulled apart, it should be able to stretch without ripping.","STEP 3","Put the dough in a clean bowl, cover with a tea towel and leave to rise for 1½ hrs or until doubled in size. Or, transfer to the fridge to slowly rise for up to 24 hrs (this will improve the texture and flavour).","STEP 4","If the dough is chilled, remove from the fridge 1 hr before shaping. Divide into 10 equal portions (weigh them out if you want to be accurate). To make round buns, roll and shape each piece into a smooth ball, or to make finger buns, roll and shape each piece into a finger shape. Arrange on a lined baking tray, leaving space between each. Cover loosely and leave to rise for 30 mins-1 hr more until doubled.","STEP 5","Heat the oven to 180C/160C fan/ gas 4. Brush the buns with milk and bake for 25-30 mins until golden. Put on a wire rack and leave to cool.","STEP 6","Mix the icing sugar with 2-3 tbsp water – it should be thick. Divide between bowls, depending on how many food colourings you’re using (we used three). Dye each with a different colouring, adding a splash more water if needed.","STEP 7","Whisk the cream and 1 tbsp icing sugar until just holding its shape. Don’t overwhip, as it will thicken as you pipe (see tip, below). Fit a piping bag with a star nozzle and fill with a third\xa0of the cream.","STEP 8","Split the round buns in half as you would a burger bun, or the finger buns down the middle lengthways. Spoon roughly 60g lemon curd or jam over the bottom half of each bun (or down the middle), alternating the flavours, then pipe over a swirl of cream. Continue until all the buns are filled, refilling the piping bag with cream as needed. Spoon some icing over each bun, matching the colours to the jam (we used yellow for the curd, pink for the raspberry jam and purple for the blackcurrant). Decorate with the glacé cherries, sprinkles and crystallised petals, if you like, then leave to set for about 20 mins before serving. Best eaten the day they’re made, but will keep\xa0in the fridge for 24 hrs."]
'Raspberry & almond traybake', ["250g self-raising flour","50g ground almonds","200g butter , diced","280g golden granulated sugar","50g desiccated coconut","2  medium eggs","350-450g/12oz-1lb  fresh or frozen raspberries"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 180C/fan160C/gas 4. Butter an oblong cake tin (about 31 x 17 x 3cm). Tip the flour, ground almonds, butter and sugar into a food processor and whizz just until the butter is evenly distributed – or rub together by hand. Remove 85g/3oz of the mix, stir in the coconut and put to one side. Add the eggs to the remaining mixture in the food processor and whizz quickly – or mix with a wooden spoon. It doesn’t need to be very smooth.","STEP 2","Spread this mixture over the base of the tin, then scatter half the raspberries over the top. Sprinkle with the coconut mixture and bake for 45 mins. Dot the remaining fruit over the surface and cook for a further 15 mins, until firm to the touch. Cool in the tin and cut into slices, squares, whichever shape you want. They will keep for up to 2 days in the fridge."]
'Blackcurrant bakewell', ["250g softened butter , plus extra for greasing","280g self-raising flour","250g golden caster sugar","½ tsp baking powder","4 eggs","150ml pot natural yogurt","1 tsp vanilla paste or extract","1 tsp almond extract","4 tbsp blackcurrant jam","25g toasted flaked almonds","icing sugar , to dust"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Butter\xa0a 20 x 30cm baking or roasting tin and line with baking parchment. To make the sponge batter, beat the butter, flour, sugar, baking powder, eggs, yogurt, vanilla and almond extract in a large bowl with an electric whisk until lump-free. Spoon into the tin and bake for 10 mins.","STEP 2","Quickly dot over the jam, scatter over the almonds, then bake for 15-20 mins more until golden and risen and a skewer poked in comes out clean. Cool in the tin, then dust with icing sugar."]
'Easy-bake bread', ["500g strong bread flour","7g sachet fast-action dried yeast","1 tsp salt","300ml hand-hot water","2 tbsp sunflower oil","1 tbsp honey"], ["STEP 1","Tip the flour into a bowl and mix in the yeast with the salt. Stir in the water, oil and honey. Now bring together to make a soft dough – I use my hands, but a wooden spoon or knife from the cutlery drawer is fine. Tip onto a lightly floured surface and knead for 10 mins. It is worth putting in the time to do this as it will pay off later with lovely airy bread.","STEP 2","Don’t keep adding flour, a wet dough is better than a dry one, which will bake to a tough texture, so if you don’t like the dough sticking to your hands, lightly oil them. If you are adding flavourings, knead them in gently now.","STEP 3","Turn the dough into an oiled 1kg bread tin and cover with oiled cling film (or better still, a free unused shower cap from your last hotel stay!). Put in a warm place until the bread fills the tin, it should take between 1-2 hrs.","STEP 4","Uncover and bake your bread at 200C/180C fan/gas 6 for 30-35 mins until golden. Tip out of the tin and tap the base of the loaf. It should sound hollow when fully cooked. If not cooked, put loaf back in the oven out of the tin and test again after 10 mins. Cool."]
'Sticky cherry bakewell buns', ["500g pack white bread mix","100g golden caster sugar","200-250ml warm milk","50g salted butter , melted","1 medium egg , lightly beaten","3 tsp almond essence","plain flour , for dusting","a little oil , for proving","180g raspberry jam","250g icing sugar","12 glacé cherries","30g flaked almonds , toasted (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Combine the bread mix and caster sugar in a large bowl. Make a well in the centre and pour in 200ml of the milk, the melted butter, egg and half of the almond essence, then mix together swiftly with a wooden spoon. If it feels a little dry, add a dash more milk. Knead on a lightly floured surface for 5-10 mins until you have a dough that is smooth and springy. Put the dough in a large, lightly oiled\xa0mixing bowl, then cover and leave in a warm place for 1½-2 hrs, or until doubled in size.","STEP 2","Mix the raspberry jam and remaining almond essence together in a small bowl. Tip the dough out of its bowl onto a lightly floured surface and knock it back (gently kneading it a few times to expel the air). Split the dough into 12 equal-sized pieces, then shape each one into a round and roll out to a diameter of about 10cm. Drop a level tsp of the jam into the centre of each round and fold in the ends to cover the jam so that it’s in the centre of the bun. Pinch the ends tightly together to seal. Arrange nine of the buns, pinched-side down, on a lined baking sheet in a circle. Place the remaining three in the centre, leaving a little space between each one so they can spread out. Cover loosely and leave for 1 hr more to double in size.","STEP 3","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/ gas 6. Bake for 20-25 mins in the centre of the oven until golden brown, then remove from the oven and leave to cool completely on the baking sheet.","STEP 4","Mix the icing sugar and 3 tbsp water together to create a thick, glossy icing. Spread the icing over the buns and top each one with a glacé cherry, then sprinkle over the almonds. Leave the icing to set for at least 10 mins."]
'Lemon sponge cake', ["175g unsalted butter , softened, plus extra for the tin","175g golden caster sugar","3 large eggs","3 large unwaxed lemons , zested, plus 4-4 ½ tbsp juice","250g self-raising flour","½ tsp baking powder","100g Greek yogurt","400g icing sugar","lemon zest or candied peel, to serve (optional)","2 large lemons","200g granulated sugar"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 170C/150C fan/gas 3. Butter a deep, loose-bottomed, 18cm cake tin and line the base with baking parchment.","STEP 2","Beat the butter and caster sugar together with an electric whisk until fluffy and pale in colour. Crack the eggs in one at a time, beating well after each addition, then stir in the lemon zest. Fold in the flour, baking powder and ½ tsp salt, then fold in the yogurt.","STEP 3","Spoon the mixture into the lined tin, smoothing the top with a spatula. Bake in the centre of the oven for 50-55 mins, or until golden brown on top and firm to the touch. Cool in the tin for 10 mins before turning out onto a wire rack to cool completely. Will keep in an airtight container for up to four days, or in the freezer for up to a month.","STEP 4","When you’re ready to decorate, sieve the icing sugar into a bowl and beat in enough of the lemon juice to create a thick icing. Set the cake on a serving plate or cake stand, then spoon over the icing, allowing it to drip down the sides a little. Top with the lemon zest or candied peel, if using (see below), and cut into generous wedges to serve.","STEP 5","To make candied lemon peel, peel large, wide strips from the lemons using a vegetable peeler. Remove any pith with a knife, then julienne the peel into very thin matchsticks. Tip the granulated sugar into a saucepan with 200ml water and set over a medium heat until the sugar has dissolved. Add the lemon peel and simmer gently for 15 mins, then scoop the peel out using a slotted spoon and set on a piece of kitchen paper to cool. Use to decorate the top of your cake."]
'Shortbread recipe', ["300g butter, softened","140g golden caster sugar, plus 4 tbsp","300g plain flour","140g rice flour"], ["STEP 1","Place the butter and 140g sugar in a food processor and whizz until smooth.","STEP 2","Tip in both the flours and a pinch of salt, then whizz until mixture comes together.","STEP 3","Using your hands, roughly spread the mixture out in a 20 x 30 x 4cm baking tray. Cover with cling film and smooth over until there are no wrinkles. Place in the fridge, uncooked, for at least 30 mins and up to 2 days.","STEP 4","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Remove cling film, then lightly mark the shortbread all over with a fork.","STEP 5","Sprinkle with the remaining sugar, then bake for 20-25 mins.","STEP 6","Leave to cool in the tin, then cut into 24 thin slices. Shortbread will keep in an airtight container for up to 1 week."]
'Raspberry honey flapjacks', ["150g butter","150g light brown soft sugar","4 tbsp honey (we used heather honey)","300g porridge oats","100g frozen raspberries"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6 and line a 20 x 20cm baking tin with parchment. Melt the butter, sugar, honey and a pinch of salt in a pan. Once the mixture is bubbling and combined, stir in the oats.","STEP 2","Tip the oat mixture into the lined baking tin and press down with the back of a spoon. Scatter over the raspberries, then lightly press them into the oat mixture. Bake for 25-30 mins until golden brown. Leave to cool, then cut into 9 or 12 flapjacks."]
'Seeded wholemeal loaf', ["400g strong wholemeal bread flour","100g spelt flour","7g sachet fast-action dried yeast","1 tbsp black treacle","oil, for greasing","50g mixed seeds (we used pumpkin, sunflower, poppy and linseeds)","1 egg yolk, loosened with a fork"], ["STEP 1","Combine both flours in a large bowl with the yeast and 1 tsp fine salt. Mix the treacle with 250ml warm water until well combined. Stir into the flour to make a slightly sticky dough. If you need to add more water, splash it in 1 tbsp at a time.","STEP 2","Knead the dough on a lightly floured surface for 10 mins (or in a tabletop mixer for 5-7 mins). Your dough should be smooth and elastic when it’s ready. Place the dough in a lightly oiled bowl, flip the dough over to coat it in oil, then cover with a sheet of oiled cling film. Leave in a warm place until doubled in size – this will take about 1 hr (see note, below). Lightly oil a 900g loaf tin.","STEP 3","Once doubled in size, knead the dough again for 3-5 mins to knock out the air bubbles – add most of the seeds and work these into the dough as you knead. Shape the dough into an oval roughly the same length as your tin. Place in the tin and leave to prove, covered with oiled cling film, for 30-45 mins until it has nearly doubled in size again. Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6.","STEP 4","Gently press a finger into the loaf to check if it has had enough proving time (see tip). When it’s ready, glaze the top of the loaf with the egg yolk and sprinkle over the remaining seeds. Bake in the oven for 40-45 mins until golden brown – if you tip the loaf out of the tin and tap the bottom, it should sound hollow. Leave to cool on a wire rack for at least 30 mins before slicing."]
'Lemon & poppyseed cupcakes', ["225g self-raising flour","175g golden caster sugar","zest 2 lemons","1 tbsp poppy seeds , toasted","3 eggs","100g natural yogurt","175g butter , melted and cooled a little","225g butter , softened","400g icing sugar , sifted","juice 1 lemon","few drops yellow food colouring","icing flowers or yellow sprinkles, to decorate"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4 and line a 12-hole muffin tin with cupcake or muffin cases. Mix the flour, sugar, lemon zest and poppy seeds together in a large mixing bowl. Beat the eggs into the yogurt, then tip this into the dry ingredients with the melted butter. Mix together with a wooden spoon or whisk until lump-free, then divide between the cases. Bake for 20-22 mins until a skewer poked in comes out clean – the cakes will be quite pale on top still. Cool for 5 mins in the tin, then carefully lift onto a wire rack to finish cooling.","STEP 2","To ice, beat the softened butter until really soft in a large bowl, then gradually beat in the icing sugar and lemon juice. Stir in enough food colouring for a pale lemon colour, then spoon the icing into a piping bag with a large star nozzle.","STEP 3","Ice one cake at a time, holding the piping bag almost upright with the nozzle about 1cm from the surface of the cake. Pipe one spiral of icing around the edge, then pause to break the flow before moving the nozzle towards the centre slightly and piping a second, smaller spiral that continues until there are no gaps in the centre. Slightly ‘dot’ the nozzle into the icing as you stop squeezing to finish neatly. Repeat to cover all the cakes, then top with sugar decorations or scatter with sprinkles."]
'Easy sourdough bread', ["100g strong white bread flour","100g organic dark rye flour","0.5 x 7g sachet fast-action dried yeast","400g strong white bread flour","0.5 x 7g sachet fast-action dried yeast"], ["STEP 1","To make your starter, place all the ingredients in a bowl and add 250ml cold water. Mix together thoroughly with a spoon until you have a spongy mixture, then cover with cling film and leave at room temperature at least overnight, but up to 24 hrs if you have time.","STEP 2","To make the bread dough, tip the ingredients into a clean bowl and add 1 tbsp fine salt, 200ml cold water and your starter. Bring all the ingredients together to a dough, adding a splash more water if too stiff, then tip out onto a lightly floured surface and knead for at least 10 mins until smooth, elastic and springy (this will take 5-7 mins in a mixer with a dough hook). Place the dough in a clean, lightly oiled bowl, cover with cling film and leave until doubled in size – about 1 hr at room temperature, 3 hrs in the fridge (see tips, below).","STEP 3","Tip the dough onto a floured surface and gently shape into a round – you don’t want to knock too much air out of the dough. Dust a piece of baking parchment heavily with flour and sit the dough on top. Cover with a tea towel and leave to prove for 1 hr until doubled in size.","STEP 4","Heat oven to 220C/200C fan/gas 7. Place a sturdy flat baking tray on the middle shelf of the oven and a smaller tray with sides underneath. Dust the dough with flour and slash with a utility knife. Slide the bread onto the hot tray on top and throw a few ice cubes (or pour some cold water) onto the tray below – this creates a burst of steam, which helps the bread form a nice crust. Bake for 25-30 mins until the loaf sounds hollow when tapped on the bottom. Leave the bread to cool completely."]
'Chocolate & orange fudge squares', ["200g plain chocolate , broken into cubes (we used Bournville)","200g dark muscovado sugar","175g butter , plus extra for greasing","3 eggs , separated","140g plain flour","1 tsp vanilla extract","zest 1 orange","200g tub soft cheese (I used Philadelphia Extra Light)","½ tsp vanilla extract","50g icing sugar"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/fan 160C/gas 4. Butter and line a traybake tin, 23 x 23cm or thereabouts. Put the chocolate, sugar and butter in a pan, then heat very gently for about 5 mins, stirring every min until the butter and chocolate have melted. Leave to cool for 10 mins. Beat in the egg yolks, flour, vanilla and half the orange zest.","STEP 2","Put the egg whites into a large, very clean bowl, then whisk until they stand up in peaks. Stir ¼ of the whites into the chocolate mix to loosen it, then carefully fold in the rest with a metal spoon. Pour the mix into the tin, then bake for 25 mins or until evenly risen and just firm to the touch. Cool in the tin, then cut into squares. Can be frozen for up to 1 month.","STEP 3","Beat together the cheese, vanilla, sugar and remaining zest until smooth. Spread over each chocolate square and serve. If you’re making ahead, spread the topping over just before serving."]
'Chocolate egg baked tart', ["80g butter , softened","40g golden caster sugar","120g self raising flour","75g butter","100g dark chocolate (70% cocoa)","75g golden caster sugar","50g plain flour","4 large eggs , beaten","2 x 80g bags of  chocolate eggs (we used Galaxy Golden Eggs)","crème fraîche , to serve"], ["STEP 1","For the shortbread base, beat the butter and sugar together until light and creamy, then mix in the flour. Press the dough into the base of a 20-21cm tart tin and put in the fridge for 20 mins to harden.","STEP 2","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/ gas 4. Prick the base all over with a fork and bake in the centre of the oven for 15 mins until lightly golden.","STEP 3","Meanwhile, melt the butter and chocolate together in a saucepan over a low heat. Once melted, stir in the sugar and flour, then gradually beat in the eggs. Pour the filling over the base and cover the top in chocolate eggs. Return to the oven and bake for 12-15 mins or until the fiilling is just set at the edges but the centre is still shiny and a bit wobbly. Remove from the oven and put in the fridge to chill. Can be made a day ahead and kept in the tin overnight. To release from the tin, warm the sides with a hot dishcloth for a couple of mins. Serve with crème fraîche."]
'Little rose & almond cupcakes', ["140g self-raising flour","100g ground almond","½ tsp baking powder","175g caster sugar","½ tsp almond  extract","3 large eggs","100g natural yogurt","175g melted butter","100g icing sugar , plus extra for dusting and sticking syrup","350g ready-roll icing","175g marzipan","green, yellow and pink food colourings"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4 and line a 12-hole muffin tin with cupcake or muffin cases. Mix the flour, almonds, baking powder and sugar together in a large bowl. Beat the almond extract and eggs into the yogurt, then tip this into the dry ingredients with the butter. Whisk together until lump-free, then divide between the cases. Bake for 18-22 mins until a skewer poked in comes out clean. Cool on a wire rack. The cakes will freeze for up to 1 month.","STEP 2","Roll out the marzipan on a surface dusted with a little icing sugar, to about the thickness of a £1 coin. Using a 6cm round biscuit cutter, stamp out 12 circles, re-rolling and stamping trimmings if necessary. Mix enough icing sugar into a cup of water to give a syrupy icing, then brush over backs of the marzipan circles and stick onto cakes.","STEP 3","Knead a little yellow food colouring into one-quarter of the ready-roll icing, a little pink into another quarter and green into another quarter. Wrap up the green icing and set aside, then repeat step 2 using a 7cm cutter to stamp out 4 circles each from the pink, yellow and white icing, sticking again with syrup.","STEP 4","Mix enough water into the 100g icing sugar to give a stiff-ish icing. Divide into three, leave one white, and colour the others pink and yellow – make these colours a little darker so the roses stand out. Transfer icing into small food bags, twist tops to seal and snip off just the tiniest tip of one corner on each bag. Pipe spirals on cakes, mixing up the colours. Pinch small bits of the green icing into leaves, marking the vein with a toothpick if you like. Add 1, 2 or 3 leaves to each spiral so it looks like a rose (you can use the syrupy icing to help them stick if you need). The cakes are best eaten within 2 days, and once decorated will keep for 1-2 days in airtight containers."]
'Rhubarb & pear crumble', ["3 ripe  pears","600g rhubarb","100g golden caster sugar","finely grated zest  and juice of 1 orange","200g wholemeal flour","200g cold  butter , diced","140g soft, light brown sugar","50g muesli  or porridge oats","25g Grape-Nuts or Clusters breakfast cereal"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/fan 180C/gas 6. For the topping, tip all the ingredients together and rub with your fingers until you have a rough pastry, then set aside in the fridge.","STEP 2","Peel the pears and chop into large chunks, then chop the rhubarb into finger-length batons. Tip into a large ovenproof dish and toss with the sugar and orange zest and juice. Crumble over the topping and bake for 40 mins until golden and bubbling at the sides. Leave to cool for 5 mins before spooning into bowls and serving with custard or ice cream."]
'Cheesy garlic bread', ["500g strong white bread flour","7g sachet/1.5 tsp fast-action yeast","1 tsp salt","2 tbsp olive oil","1 tbsp clear honey","2 garlic cloves , crushed","25g soft butter","100g mature cheddar , grated","handful thyme leaves"], ["STEP 1","Measure the flour, yeast and salt into a large bowl. Mix 300ml hand-hot water with the oil and honey in a jug, then pour into the dry mix, stirring all the time to make a soft dough.","STEP 2","Turn the dough out onto a lightly floured surface, then knead for 5 mins until the dough no longer feels sticky, sprinkling with a little more flour as you need it. Now stretch it to fit the Swiss roll tin.","STEP 3","Mix the garlic with the butter, then dot over the dough. Sprinkle over the cheese and snip over the thyme. Cover the bread with lightly oiled cling film, then leave in a warm place to rise for 40 mins.","STEP 4","Heat oven to 200C/fan 180C/gas 6. Remove the cling film, then bake the bread for 30 mins until golden and risen. Leave to cool for 10 mins, then cut into 12 pieces and serve."]
'Tiger bread', ["500g strong white bread flour, plus extra for kneading","7g sachet fast action yeast","1½ tsp caster sugar","1½ tsp fine sea salt","300-350ml warm water","vegetable oil, for the bowl","90g rice flour","½ x 7g sachet fast action yeast","¼ tsp salt","1 tsp golden caster sugar","½ tbsp toasted sesame oil","90ml warm water"], ["STEP 1","Tip the flour into a large mixing bowl. Stir through the yeast, sugar and salt. Make a well in the middle and gradually pour in the water. Swiftly mix together, then turn out onto a lightly floured surface. Knead the bread for 8-10 mins or until smooth and elastic. Lightly oil a large mixing bowl, then put\xa0the dough in\xa0the bowl, cover\xa0and leave in a warm place for 1 hr or until doubled in size.","STEP 2","Once the dough has risen,\xa0tip\xa0it onto a worktop\xa0and knead it three times. Shape the dough into an oval\xa0as best you can. Lightly flour a baking sheet and sit the loaf on it. Cover\xa0loosely with lightly oiled cling film and leave for a further 45 mins-1 hr or until doubled in size again.","STEP 3","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Whisk together all of the topping ingredients in a small bowl\xa0until you get a spreadable paste, adding more water and/or\xa0flour if necessary, then set aside to rest for 5 mins. Gently spread the mixture over the loaf with a palette knife. Place the baking sheet in the centre of the oven and bake\xa0for 35 mins. Once cooked, the loaf should sound hollow when the base is tapped and should feel light for its size. Leave to cool\xa0completely before cutting into slices."]
'Lemon drizzle slices', ["70g softened unsalted butter","120g caster sugar","2 medium eggs","140g self-raising flour","1 tsp baking powder","finely grated zest 1 lemon","1 tbsp lemon curd","2 tbsp full-fat milk","30g granulated sugar","juice 1 lemon","250g icing sugar","3 tbsp water","splash of yellow food colouring"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/ gas 4. Line a 20 x 20cm square baking tin with baking parchment.","STEP 2","Using an electric whisk, beat the butter and sugar together until pale, light and fluffy. Add the eggs and mix again. Add the flour, baking powder, lemon zest, lemon curd and milk, and mix with a wooden spoon until all the ingredients are thoroughly combined. Pour the mixture into the prepared tin and bake for 25-30 mins or until a skewer comes out clean.","STEP 3","Mix the sugar and lemon juice together and pour over the hot cake. Leave to cool in the tin. You can eat the cake as it is, or for a fancy finish, try making this feather icing.","STEP 4","Mix the icing sugar with just enough water to give a runny, but not watery, icing. Put a small amount of icing in a separate bowl. Add a few drops of the food colouring to the icing until pale yellow. Spoon into a disposable icing bag.","STEP 5","Remove the cake from the tin and peel off the baking parchment. Sit the cake on a wire rack over a baking tray. Spread the white icing over the top. Pipe thin lines of the coloured icing across the width of the cake. Use a cocktail stick to drag through the lines in opposite directions to create a feathered effect. Leave to set before cutting into slices."]
'Sticky toffee banana bread', ["125g soft butter , plus extra for the tin","75g caster sugar","50g dark brown soft sugar","3 medium eggs","2 large ripe bananas , mashed","50g natural yogurt","200g plain flour","2 tsp baking powder","50g pitted dates , chopped (about 10)","50g pecans or walnuts, chopped (or mixed chopped nuts)","100g light brown soft sugar","25g butter , cut into cubes","100ml double cream","150g caster sugar","50g pecan or walnuts (or mixed nuts)","50g banana chips","½ tsp sea salt flakes"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 160C/140C fan/gas 3. Butter and line a 900g loaf tin with a strip of baking parchment.","STEP 2","Beat the butter and both sugars in a bowl for 5 mins with an electric whisk until really fluffy. Whisk the eggs, banana and yogurt in a separate bowl until mostly smooth, then whisk this into the butter and sugar mixture. Fold in the flour and baking powder until just combined, then fold in the dates and nuts. Spoon into the tin, smooth over the top and bake for 1 hr-1 hr 15 mins until a skewer inserted into the middle comes out clean. Leave to cool in the tin for 10 mins, then lift out using the strip of parchment. You can serve it warm now, or leave to cool completely on a wire rack. Will keep for four days in an airtight container.","STEP 3","Meanwhile, make the toffee sauce. Put the sugar in a heavy-based frying pan and melt over a medium-low heat until light golden brown and liquid – don’t stir, just tilt the pan to melt the sugar. Carefully whisk in the butter until smooth, then pour in the cream slowly and bring to a bubble. Mix until the sauce is smooth and shiny. Pour into a heatproof bowl, cover and leave to cool to room temperature.","STEP 4","For the brittle, put the sugar in a frying pan with 2 tbsp water over a medium heat, stir briefly, then simmer for 10 mins until the caramel turns amber. Don’t stir after the initial mix, just tilt the pan to get an even deep golden colour.","STEP 5","Meanwhile, line a baking tray with baking parchment. Carefully stir the nuts, banana chips and salt\xa0into the caramel, until well coated, then pour onto the tray. Tip the tray (or use a spoon) to make sure the nuts are in a single layer – or they will be harder to separate later. Leave to cool completely before breaking the brittle into shards.","STEP 6","Stir the toffee sauce to loosen if it’s become stiff, or warm for a few seconds in the microwave (add a splash more cream if you need to), then drizzle over the cake so it drips down the sides. Top with the shards of brittle. Will keep for two days in an airtight container."]
'Cheese & pesto whirls', ["450g strong white bread flour, plus a little for dusting","7g sachet fast-action dried yeast","1 tsp golden caster sugar","2 tbsp olive oil, plus a drizzle","150g tub fresh pesto","240g tub semi-dried tomatoes, drained and roughly chopped","100g grated mozzarella (ready-grated is best for this, as it is drier than fresh)","50g parmesan (or vegetarian alternative), grated","handful basil leaves"], ["STEP 1","Combine the flour, yeast, sugar and 1½ tsp fine salt in a large mixing bowl, or the bowl of a tabletop mixer. Measure out 300ml warm water and add roughly 280ml to the flour, along with the olive oil, and start mixing until the ingredients start to clump together as a dough. If the dough seems a little dry, add the remaining water. Once combined, knead for 10 mins by hand on your work surface, or for 5 mins on a medium speed in a mixer. The dough is ready when it feels soft, springy and elastic. Clean the bowl, drizzle in a little oil, then pop the dough back in, turning it over and coating the sides of the bowl in oil. Cover with some oiled cling film and set aside in a warm place to double in size – this will take 1-3 hrs, depending on the temperature.","STEP 2","Line a baking tray with parchment. Uncover the dough and punch it down a couple of times with your fist, knocking out all the air bubbles. Tip out onto a floured work surface and dust the top with a little flour too, if it is sticky. Roll the dough out to a rectangle, roughly 40 x 30cm. Spread the pesto over the dough, then scatter over the tomatoes, both cheeses and the basil. Roll the dough up from one of the longer sides, into a long sausage.","STEP 3","Use a sharp knife to cut the dough into 12 even pieces. Place on the baking tray, cut-side up, in a 3-by-4 formation, making sure the open end of each roll is tucked in towards the centre on the arrangement – this will prevent them from uncoiling during cooking. Leave a little space between each roll as they will grow and touch as they prove. Loosely cover with oiled cling film and leave to prove for 30 mins–1 hr until almost doubled in size again. Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6.","STEP 4","Uncover the bread when it is puffed up. Bake on the middle shelf in the oven for 35-40 mins until golden brown and the centre looks dry and not doughy. Remove from the oven and leave to cool for at least 10 mins."]
'Roasted tomato, basil & Parmesan quiche', ["300g cherry tomato","drizzle olive oil","50g parmesan (or vegetarian alternative), grated","2 eggs","284ml pot double cream","handful basil  leaves, shredded, plus a few small ones left whole for scattering","280g plain flour, plus extra for dusting","140g cold butter, cut into pieces"], ["STEP 1","To make the pastry, tip the flour and butter into a bowl, then rub together with your fingertips until completely mixed and crumbly. Add 8 tbsp cold water, then bring everything together with your hands until just combined. Roll into a ball and use straight away or chill for up to 2 days. The pastry can also be frozen for up to a month.","STEP 2","Roll out the pastry on a lightly floured surface to a round about 5cm larger than a 25cm tin. Use your rolling pin to lift it up, then drape over the tart case so there is an overhang of pastry on the sides. Using a small ball of pastry scraps, push the pastry into the corners of the tin. Chill in the fridge or freezer for 20 mins. Heat oven to 200C/fan 180C/gas 6.","STEP 3","In a small roasting tin, drizzle the tomatoes with olive oil and season with salt and pepper. Put the tomatoes in a low shelf of the oven.","STEP 4","Lightly prick the base of the tart with a fork, line the tart case with a large circle of greaseproof paper or foil, then fill with baking beans. Blind-bake the tart for 20 mins, remove the paper and beans, then continue to cook for 5-10 mins until biscuit brown.","STEP 5","When you remove the tart case from the oven, take out the tomatoes, too.","STEP 6","While the tart is cooking, beat the eggs in a large bowl. Gradually add the cream, then stir in the basil and season. When the case is ready, sprinkle half the cheese over the base, scatter over the tomatoes, pour over the cream mix, then finally scatter over the rest of the cheese. Bake for 20-25 mins until set and golden brown. Leave to cool in the case, trim the edges of the pastry, then remove from the tin. Scatter over the remaining basil and serve in slices."]
'Gregg’s tangy lemon tart', ["500g plain flour, plus extra for dusting","140g icing sugar","250g unsalted butter, cubed","4 egg yolks","5 eggs","140g caster sugar","150ml double cream","juice 2-3 lemon (about 100ml/3.5fl oz) and 2 tbsp lemon zest"], ["STEP 1","To make the pastry, mix the flour and icing sugar in a bowl. Rub the butter into the flour with your fingers until crumbly. Mix in the egg yolks. If the pastry is still too dry, add 1-2 tbsp water until it comes together. Roll into a ball and divide in half (freeze one half for another recipe). Flatten out the pastry with your hands, wrap the dough in cling film, then chill for at least 30 mins. While the pastry is chilling, make the filling. Beat all the ingredients, except for the zest, together. Sieve the mixture, then stir in the zest.","STEP 2","Roll out the pastry on a lightly floured surface to about the thickness of a £1 coin, then lift into a 23cm tart tin. Press down gently on the bottom and sides, then trim off any excess pastry. Stab a few holes in the bottom with a fork and put back in the fridge for 30 mins.","STEP 3","Heat oven to 160C/140C fan/gas 3. Line the tart with foil and fill with rice or dried beans. Bake for 10 mins, then remove the tart tin from the oven, discard the foil, and bake for another 20 mins until biscuity. When the pastry is ready, remove it from the oven, pour in the lemon mixture and bake again for 30-35 mins until just set. Leave to cool, then remove the tart from the tin and serve at room temperature or chilled."]
'Lemon drizzle cakes', ["250g pack of butter, softenend","400g caster sugar","3 eggs, lightly beaten","250g self-raising flour","zest and juice 3 lemons"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 160C/140C fan/gas 3. Line a muffin tin with 12 muffin cases. With an electric whisk, whisk the butter, 250g of the sugar, eggs, flour, zest of 2 lemons and juice from 1 lemon until just combined – don’t over-whisk. Fill the cases two thirds full, then bake on a middle shelf for 30 mins, until a skewer poked in comes out clean.","STEP 2","Cool for 10 mins, then transfer cakes to a cooling rack on a tray and poke each a few times with a skewer. Pour remaining lemon juice over remaining 150g sugar and zest 1 lemon, and immediately spoon over the cakes. Leave to cool."]
'Broccoli and kale green soup', ["500ml stock , made by mixing 1 tbsp bouillon powder and boiling water in a jug","1 tbsp sunflower oil","2 garlic cloves , sliced","thumb-sized piece  ginger , sliced","½ tsp ground coriander","3cm/1in piece fresh turmeric root, peeled and grated, or 1/2 tsp ground turmeric","pinch of pink Himalayan salt","200g courgettes , roughly sliced","85g broccoli","100g kale , chopped","1 lime , zested and juiced","small pack parsley , roughly chopped, reserving a few whole leaves to serve"], ["STEP 1","Put the oil in a deep pan, add the garlic, ginger, coriander, turmeric and salt, fry on a medium heat for 2 mins, then add 3 tbsp water to give a bit more moisture to the spices.","STEP 2","Add the courgettes, making sure you mix well to coat the slices in all the spices, and continue cooking for 3 mins. Add 400ml stock and leave to simmer for 3 mins.","STEP 3","Add the broccoli, kale and lime juice with the rest of the stock. Leave to cook again for another 3-4 mins until all the vegetables are soft.","STEP 4","Take off the heat and add the chopped parsley. Pour everything into a blender and blend on high speed until smooth. It will be a beautiful green with bits of dark speckled through (which is the kale). Garnish with lime zest and parsley."]
'Tomato soup', ["1-1.25kg/2lb 4oz-2lb 12oz ripe  tomatoes","1 medium onion","1 small carrot","1 celery  stick","2 tbsp olive oil","2 squirts of tomato purée (about 2 tsp)","a good pinch of sugar","2 bay leaves","1.2 litres/ 2 pints hot vegetable stock (made with boiling water and 4 rounded tsp bouillon powder or 2 stock cubes)"], ["STEP 1","Firstly, prepare your vegetables. You need 1-1.25kg/2lb 4oz-2lb 12oz ripe tomatoes. If the tomatoes are on their vines, pull them off. The green stalky bits should come off at the same time, but if they don\'t, just pull or twist them off afterwards. Throw the vines and green bits away and wash the tomatoes. Now cut each tomato into quarters and slice off any hard cores (they don\'t soften during cooking and you\'d get hard bits in the soup at the end). Peel 1 medium onion and 1 small carrot and chop them into small pieces. Chop 1 celery stick roughly the same size.","STEP 2","Spoon 2 tbsp olive oil into a large heavy-based pan\xa0and heat it over a low heat. Hold your hand over the pan until you can feel the heat rising from the oil, then tip in the onion, carrot and celery and mix them together with a wooden spoon. Still with the heat low, cook the vegetables until they\'re soft and faintly coloured. This should take about 10 minutes and you should stir them two or three times so they cook evenly and don’t stick to the bottom of the pan.","STEP 3","Holding the tube over the pan, squirt in about 2 tsp of tomato purée, then stir it around so it turns the vegetables red. Shoot the tomatoes in off the chopping board, sprinkle in a good pinch of sugar and grind in a little black pepper. Tear 2 bay leaves into a few pieces and throw them into the pan. Stir to mix everything together, put the lid on the pan and let the tomatoes stew over a low heat for 10 minutes until they shrink down in the pan and their juices flow nicely. From time to time, give the pan a good shake – this will keep everything well mixed.","STEP 4","Slowly pour in the 1.2 litres/ 2 pints of hot stock (made with boiling water and 4 rounded tsp bouillon powder or 2 stock cubes), stirring at the same time to mix it with the vegetables. Turn up the heat as high as it will go and wait until everything is bubbling, then turn the heat down to low again and put the lid back on the pan. Cook gently for 25 minutes, stirring a couple of times. At the end of cooking the tomatoes will have broken down and be very slushy looking.","STEP 5","Remove the pan from the heat, take the lid off and stand back for a few seconds or so while the steam escapes, then fish out the pieces of bay leaf and throw them away. Ladle the soup into your blender\xa0until it’s about three-quarters full, fit the lid on tightly and turn the machine on full. Blitz until the soup’s smooth (stop the machine and lift the lid to check after about 30 seconds), then pour the puréed soup into a large bowl. Repeat with the soup that’s left in the pan. (The soup may now be frozen for up to 3 months. Defrost before reheating.)","STEP 6","Pour the puréed soup back into the pan and reheat it over a medium heat for a few minutes, stirring occasionally until you can see bubbles breaking gently on the surface. Taste a spoonful and add a pinch or two of salt if you think the soup needs it, plus more pepper and sugar if you like. If the colour’s not a deep enough red for you, plop in another teaspoon of tomato purée and stir until it dissolves. Ladle into bowls and serve. Or sieve and serve chilled with some cream swirled in. For other serving suggestions, see opposite."]
'Mexican bean soup with guacamole', ["2 tsp rapeseed oil","1 large onion, finely chopped","1 red pepper, cut into chunks","2 garlic cloves, chopped","2 tsp mild chilli powder","1 tsp ground coriander","1 tsp ground cumin","400g can chopped tomatoes","400g can black beans","1 tsp vegetable bouillon powder","1 small avocado","handful chopped coriander","1 lime, juiced","½  red chilli, deseeded and finely chopped (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a medium pan, add the onion (reserving 1 tbsp to make the guacamole later) and pepper and fry, stirring frequently, for 10 mins. Stir in the garlic and spices, then tip in the tomatoes and beans with their liquid, half a can of water and the bouillon powder. Simmer, covered, for 15 mins.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, peel and de-stone the avocado and tip into a bowl, add the remaining onion, coriander and lime juice with a little chilli (if using) and mash well. Ladle the soup into two bowls, top with the guacamole and serve."]
'Creamy fish & mussel soup', ["500g pack mussel  in creamy sauce  (find these in the chilled aisle)","1l strong, hot fish stock  (we used Knorr Touch of Taste concentrate)","500g floury potato , cut into sugarcube-size pieces","200g mixed fish","small bunch flatleaf parsley"], ["STEP 1","Drain the sauce from the mussels into a large saucepan and add the stock. Tip in the potatoes, cover and bring to the boil. Once boiling, take off the lid and simmer for about 12 mins or until the potatoes are very tender.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, cut the fish into large chunks and roughly chop the parsley. Stir the fish and mussels into the soup, then bring back to a simmer for about 3 mins or until the fish has changed colour and flakes easily. Stir in most of the parsley, then serve scattered with the rest of the parsley and eat with crusty bread."]
'Moroccan harira', ["1-2 tbsp rapeseed oil","2 large onions , finely chopped","4 garlic cloves , chopped","2 tsp turmeric","2 tsp cumin","½ tsp cinnamon","2 red chillies , deseeded and sliced","500g carton passata","1.7l reduced-salt vegetable bouillon","175dried green lentils","2 carrots , chopped into small pieces","1 sweet potato , peeled and diced","5 celery sticks , chopped into small pieces","⅔ small pack coriander , few sprigs reserved, the rest chopped","1 lemon , cut into 4 wedges, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a large non-stick sauté pan over a medium heat and fry the onions and garlic until starting to soften. Tip in the spices and chilli, stir briefly, then pour in the passata and stock. Add the lentils, carrots, sweet potato and celery, and bring to the boil.","STEP 2","Cover the pan and leave to simmer for 30 mins, then cook uncovered for a further 5-10 mins until the vegetables and lentils are tender. Stir in the chopped coriander and serve in bowls with lemon wedges for squeezing over, and the reserved coriander sprinkled over."]
'Honeyed carrot soup', ["2 tbsp butter","2 small  leeks , sliced","800g carrots , roughly chopped","2 tsp  clear  honey","small pinch dried  chilli flakes  (optional)","1  bay leaf","2 ½l vegetable  stock","soured cream or  yogurt , to serve"], ["STEP 1","Melt the butter in a large saucepan over a medium heat. Add the leeks to the pan, then cook for 3 mins until starting to soften. Add the carrots, honey, chilli (if using) and bay leaf, then cook for 2 mins.","STEP 2","Pour in the stock, bring to the boil, then simmer for 30 mins. Blend the soup in batches, return to a clean pan, then season to taste. When ready to serve, bring back to a simmer, then ladle into mugs. Add a swirl of soured cream or yogurt and serve with garlic bread or bacon butties."]
'Indian chickpea & vegetable soup', ["1 tbsp vegetable oil","1 large onion , chopped","1 tsp finely grated fresh root ginger","1 garlic clove , chopped","1 tbsp garam masala","850ml vegetable stock","2 large carrots , quartered lengthways and chopped","400g can chickpea , drained","100g green bean , chopped"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a medium saucepan, then add the onion, ginger and garlic. Fry for 2 mins, then add the garam masala, give it 1 min more, then add the stock and carrots. Simmer for 10 mins, then add the chickpeas. Use a stick blender to whizz the soup a little. Stir in the beans and simmer for 3 mins. Pack into a flask or, if you’ve got a microwave at work, chill and heat up for lunch. Great with naan bread."]
'Curried spinach & lentil soup', ["2 tbsp rapeseed oil","1 onion , finely chopped","2 large garlic cloves , crushed","¼ tsp hot  chilli powder","1 tsp cumin seeds","1 tbsp medium curry powder","160g dried brown lentils","1.2l low-salt veg stock","large bunch coriander","30g unsalted cashew nuts , toasted","2 lemons , zested and juiced","500g spinach"], ["STEP 1","Heat 1 tbsp oil in a large saucepan. Add the onion and fry for 8 mins until soft and translucent. Stir in half the garlic, the chilli, cumin and curry powder and cook for 1 min more. Add the lentils and stock, then cover and simmer for 30 mins over a medium-low heat.","STEP 2","Put the coriander, remaining oil and garlic, the cashews and lemon zest in a food processor and\xa0blitz with 1-2 tbsp water until semi-smooth. Spoon the chutney into a bowl and set aside.","STEP 3","Stir the spinach into the soup and cook for 5 mins, or until wilted. Tip half the soup into a blender and blitz until smooth, then return this to the pan. Stir through lemon juice to taste.","STEP 4","Ladle the soup into bowls and top with generous dollops of the cashew chutney."]
'Moroccan roasted vegetable soup', ["1 red onion, cut into 8 wedges","300g carrot, cut into 2cm chunks","300g parsnip, cut into 2cm chunks","300g peeled butternut squash, cut into 2cm chunks","1 small potato, cut into 2cm chunks","2 garlic cloves","1 tbsp ras el hanout","1 ½ tbsp olive oil","1.3l hot vegetable stock","6 tbsp Greek-style yogurt and 1 tbsp finely chopped mint, to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Tip all the vegetables and the garlic into a roasting tin. Sprinkle over the ras el hanout and some seasoning, drizzle over the oil and give everything a good stir. Roast for 30-35 mins, turning the vegetables over halfway, until they’re tender and starting to caramelise a little.","STEP 2","Transfer the roasted veg to a large saucepan, pour over the hot stock and simmer for 5 mins. Purée the soup in a food processor, or in the pan with a hand blender, until smooth, then ladle into a flask for work. If eating at home, serve with a dollop of yogurt, a scattering of mint and a grinding of black pepper."]
'Sherried squash soup', ["1 large onion , halved","4 tbsp  dry (fino) sherry","1kg butternut squash  peeled, deseeded and chopped","600ml hot  vegetable stock  (we like Marigold)","seed bread croûtons  and flat leaf parsley","2 tbsp olive oil"], ["STEP 1","Fry the onion in the oil for 5 mins until softened. Add the sherry and squash and sizzle for 1-2 mins. Pour in the stock, then cover and simmer for 20 mins until the squash is tender when pierced with a knife.","STEP 2","Whizz in a food processor until smooth. Will keep in the fridge for 2 days, or freeze for 6 weeks. When ready to eat, reheat until bubbling and serve in small portions topped with seed-bread croûtons (see above right) and a parsley sprig."]
'Prawn & fennel bisque', ["450g raw tiger prawn  in their shells","4 tbsp olive oil","1 large onion , chopped","1 large fennel bulb , chopped, fronds reserved","2 carrots , chopped","150ml dry white wine","1 tbsp brandy","400g can  chopped tomato","1l fish stock","2 generous pinches paprika","150ml pot double cream","8 tiger prawns , shelled, but tail tips left on (optional)","fennel  fronds (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Shell the prawns, then fry the shells in the oil in a large pan for about 5 mins. Add the onion, fennel and carrots and cook for about 10 mins until the veg start to soften. Pour in the wine and brandy, bubble hard for about 1 min to drive off the alcohol, then add the tomatoes, stock and paprika. Cover and simmer for 30 mins. Meanwhile, chop the prawns.","STEP 2","Blitz the soup as finely as you can with a stick blender or food processor, then press through a sieve into a bowl. Spend a bit of time really working the mixture through the sieve as this will give the soup its velvety texture.","STEP 3","Tip back into a clean pan, add the prawns and cook for 10 mins, then blitz again until smooth. You can make and chill this a day ahead or freeze it for 1 month. Thaw ovenight in the fridge. To serve, gently reheat in a pan with the cream. If garnishing, cook the 8 prawns in a little butter. Spoon into small bowls and top with the prawns and snipped fennel fronds."]
'Carrot & ginger soup', ["1 tbsp rapeseed oil","1 large onion, chopped","2 tbsp coarsely grated ginger","2 garlic cloves, sliced","½ tsp ground nutmeg","850ml vegetable stock","500g carrot (preferably organic), sliced","400g can cannellini beans (no need to drain)","4 tbsp almonds in their skins, cut into slivers","sprinkle of nutmeg"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a large pan, add the onion, ginger and garlic, and fry for 5 mins until starting to soften. Stir in the nutmeg and cook for 1 min more.","STEP 2","Pour in the stock, add the carrots, beans and their liquid, then cover and simmer for 20-25 mins until the carrots are tender.","STEP 3","Scoop a third of the mixture into a bowl and blitz the remainder with a hand blender or in a food processor until smooth. Return everything to the pan and heat until bubbling. Serve topped with the almonds and nutmeg."]
'Celery soup', ["2 tbsp olive oil","300g celery, sliced, with tough strings removed","1 garlic clove, peeled","200g potatoes, peeled and cut into chunks","500ml vegetable stock","100ml milk","crusty bread, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a large saucepan over a medium heat, tip in the celery, garlic and potatoes and\xa0coat in the oil. Add a splash of water and a big pinch of salt and cook, stirring regularly for 15 mins, adding a little more water if the veg begins to stick.","STEP 2","Pour in the vegetable stock and bring to the boil, then turn the heat down and simmer for 20 mins further, until the potatoes are falling apart and the celery is soft. Use a stick blender to purée the soup, then pour in the milk and blitz again.\xa0Season to taste. Serve with crusty bread."]
'Lentil soup', ["2l vegetable or ham stock","150g red lentils","6 carrots, finely chopped","2 medium leeks, sliced (about 300g)","small handful of chopped  parsley, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat the stock in a large pan and add the lentils. Bring to the boil and allow the lentils to soften for a few minutes.","STEP 2","Add the carrots and leeks and season (don\'t add salt if you use ham stock as it will make it too salty). Bring to the boil, then reduce the heat, cover and simmer for 45-60 mins until the lentils have broken down. Scatter over the parsley and serve with buttered bread, if you like."]
'Acquacotta', ["3 tbsp olive oil","3 celery sticks, chopped","2 small carrots , chopped","1 red onion , finely chopped","2 garlic cloves , finely chopped","2 tsp thyme leaves , plus extra to serve","50g dried porcini mushrooms","225g plum tomatoes , deseeded and chopped","850ml chicken stock","2 tbsp chopped parsley","3 slices good crusty bread , toasted and torn into chunks","6 eggs"], ["STEP 1","Heat the olive oil in a large saucepan and gently fry the celery, carrots, onion, garlic and thyme for 10-15 mins until softened. Meanwhile, cover the porcini with hot water and soak for 15 mins until softened and swollen. Drain the mushrooms, reserving the soaking liquid, and roughly chop. Add to the softened vegetables along with the soaking liquid and cook for another 5 mins.","STEP 2","Stir in the tomatoes and cook for 10 mins until they begin to break down, then pour in the stock and bring to a gentle simmer.","STEP 3","Poach the 6 eggs in a separate large saucepan of simmering water for 3-4 mins until set, then remove with a slotted spoon. Add the parsley and a little seasoning to the soup, and mix in the torn-up toasted bread. Divide the soup between 6 bowls and place an egg on top of each. Serve scattered with extra thyme."]
'Salmon noodle soup', ["1l low-salt chicken stock","2 tsp Thai red curry paste","100g flat rice noodle","150g pack shiitake mushroom , sliced","125g pack baby corn , sliced","2 skinless salmon fillets , sliced","juice 2 limes","1 tbsp reduced-salt soy sauce","pinch brown sugar","small bunch coriander , chopped"], ["STEP 1","Pour the stock into a large pan, bring to the boil, then stir in the curry paste. Add the noodles and cook for 8 mins. Tip in the mushrooms and corn and cook for 2 mins more.","STEP 2","Add the salmon to the pan and cook for 3 mins or until cooked through. Remove from the heat and stir in the lime juice, soy sauce and a pinch of sugar. Ladle into 4 bowls and sprinkle over the coriander just before you serve."]
'Scotch broth', ["250g broth mix (or a mixture of 75g pearl barley, 75g yellow split peas, 50g red split lentils and 50g green split or marrowfat peas)","1 tbsp vegetable or olive oil","1 large onion, finely chopped","1 leek, washed and sliced","1 medium turnip, peeled and finely chopped","3 carrots, finely chopped","3 celery sticks, trimmed and finely chopped","3 litres lamb stock","200g kale chopped"], ["STEP 1","Rinse the soup mix and soak in cold water for 8 hrs or overnight, covered in a cool place. Drain and rinse well.","STEP 2","Heat the oil in a large pan and fry the onion, leek, turnip, carrots and celery for 10 mins, covered with a lid, until soft but not golden. Add a generous pinch of salt and a good grinding of pepper.","STEP 3","Pour the stock into the pan and bring to a simmer. Add the drained soup mix, and gently simmer for 1 hr part-covered, until the barley and split peas are tender. Season again if needed. Stir in the kale, and cook for 10-15 mins until tender, then ladle into bowls to serve."]
'Leek & butter bean soup with crispy kale & bacon', ["4 tsp olive oil","500g leeks , sliced","4 thyme sprigs , leaves picked","2 x 400g cans butter beans","500ml vegetable bouillon stock","2 tsp wholegrain mustard","½ small pack flat-leaf parsley","3 rashers streaky bacon","40g chopped kale , any tough stems removed","25g hazelnuts , roughly chopped"], ["STEP 1","Heat 1 tbsp oil in a large saucepan over a low heat. Add the leeks, thyme and seasoning. Cover and cook for 15 mins until softened, adding a splash of water if the leeks start to stick. Add the butter beans with the water from the cans, the stock and mustard. Bring to the boil and simmer for 3-4 mins until hot. Blend the soup in a food processor or with a stick blender, stir through the parsley and check the seasoning.","STEP 2","Put the bacon in a large, non-stick frying pan over a medium heat. Cook for 3-4 mins until crispy, then set side to cool. Add the remaining 1 tsp oil to the pan, and tip in the kale and hazelnuts. Cook for 2 mins, stirring until the kale is wilted and crisping at the edges and the hazelnuts are toasted. Cut the bacon into small pieces, then stir into the kale mixture.","STEP 3","Reheat the soup, adding a splash of water if it is too thick. Serve in bowls sprinkled with the bacon & kale mixture."]
'Courgette, potato & cheddar soup', ["500g potato , unpeeled and roughly chopped","2 vegetable stock cubes","1kg courgettes , roughly chopped","bunch spring onion , sliced - save 1 for serving, if eating straight away","100g extra-mature cheddar or vegetarian alternative, grated, plus a little extra to serve","good grating fresh nutmeg , plus extra to serve"], ["STEP 1","Put the potatoes in a large pan with just enough water to cover them and crumble in the stock cubes. Bring to the boil, then cover and cook for 5 mins. Add the courgettes, put the lid back on and cook for 5 mins more. Throw in the spring onions, cover and cook for a final 5 mins.","STEP 2","Take off the heat, then stir in the cheese and season with the nutmeg, salt and pepper. Whizz to a thick soup, adding more hot water until you get the consistency you like. Serve scattered with extra grated cheddar, spring onions and nutmeg or pepper. Or cool and freeze in freezer bags or containers with good lids for up to 3 months."]
'Gazpacho with runner bean tempura & pickled coriander seeds', ["25ml white wine vinegar","1 tsp sherry vinegar","1 tbsp caster sugar","2 tsp coriander seeds","1kg tomatoes","200g cucumber , peeled and deseeded","2 tsp capers","2 garlic cloves","1 red chilli , deseeded","2 tbsp extra virgin olive oil","1-2 tbsp sherry vinegar","150ml vegetable oil","100g runner beans , stringed, cut in half, then sliced lengthways (discarding tough beans from inside)","90g plain flour","½ tsp cumin seeds","½ egg , beaten","200ml ice-cold sparkling water"], ["STEP 1","To make the pickled coriander seeds, put the vinegars in a small pan with the sugar and 25ml water. Bring to the boil, drop in the coriander seeds, turn off the heat and leave to infuse.","STEP 2","To peel the tomatoes, lightly score a cross in the top of each one, place in a large bowl and cover with boiling water for 1 min. Drain and peel. Cut each one into quarters and use a knife to scrape away the seeds. Don’t discard what you remove – sieve out the seeds and use the juice in the next step.","STEP 3","Blitz the tomatoes, cucumber, capers, garlic, chilli and 2 tsp sea salt in a food processor. Pour into a bowl and chill for a couple of hours for the flavours to meld, then add the olive oil and stir. Add 1 tbsp of the sherry vinegar and taste. If it needs more to bring out the flavours, then add another tbsp. Divide between bowls and chill the soup while you make the runner bean tempura.","STEP 4","Pour the vegetable oil into a high-sided saucepan and set over a medium heat to get up to temperature (about 180C) while you make the batter.","STEP 5","To make the batter, put the flour, a pinch of salt and the cumin seeds in a bowl and stir. Add the beaten egg, then pour in the water. Gently stir the mixture, taking care not to over-mix it – a few lumps help give tempura its texture. Test the temperature of the oil by dropping in a little bit of batter. It should bubble and float to the top. If it browns immediately, reduce the heat.","STEP 6","Mix the runner beans into the batter and then fry in batches, removing with a slotted spoon once they’re crisp, golden and just starting to brown. Drain on kitchen paper and season. Top each bowl of soup with some crispy runner beans, and spoon over a little of the drained, pickled coriander seeds."]
'Thai chicken & mushroom broth', ["1l hot chicken stock","1 tbsp Thai red curry paste","1 tbsp Thai fish sauce","2 tsp sugar","zest and juice 2 limes","100g Portobello mushrooms, sliced","bunch spring onions, sliced, whites and greens seperated","200g leftover chicken, shredded"], ["STEP 1","Tip the stock into a saucepan, then stir in the curry paste, fish sauce, sugar, lime juice and most of the zest. Bring to the boil, then add the mushrooms and whites of the spring onion. Cover, then simmer for 2 mins.","STEP 2","Stir in the chicken and most of the spring onion greens to gently heat through, then serve ladled into bowls and scattered with the remaining lime zest. Serve with extra lime juice, sugar and fish sauce on the side so everyone can adjust their own bowlfuls."]
'Spiced red lentil soup', ["1 onion , chopped","1 tbsp olive oil","1-2 tbsp Thai red curry paste","300g red lentil","1.7l vegetable stock","200ml coconut milk","chopped spring onions , to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Fry the onion in 1 tbsp olive oil until soft. Stir in the red Thai curry paste, depending how hot you want it.","STEP 2","Add red lentils and mix to coat in the paste. Pour over vegetable stock and simmer for 20 mins until the lentils are tender.","STEP 3","Blend with coconut milk and reheat if needed. Serve scattered with chopped spring onions, if you like."]
'Mexican chicken & wild rice soup', ["1 tsp olive oil","1 onion , finely chopped","1 green pepper , diced","200g sweetcorn , frozen or from a can","1-2 tbsp chipotle paste (we used Discovery)","250g Pouch ready-cooked long-grain and wild rice mix (we used Uncle Ben\'s)","400g can black beans in water, rinsed and drained","1.3l low-sodium chicken stock","2 cooked skinless chicken breasts , shredded","small bunch coriander , chopped","low-fat soured cream and reduced fat guacamole, to serve, if you like"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a large non-stick frying pan and cook the onion for 5 mins. Throw in the pepper and cook for 2 mins more, then add the sweetcorn, chipotle paste and rice. Stir well and cook for 1-2 mins.","STEP 2","Add the black beans and the stock. Bring to the boil, turn down to a simmer, then add half the chicken and coriander. Cool for 2-3 mins, then ladle into bowls.","STEP 3","Scatter over the rest of the chicken and coriander. Serve with a dollop each of guacamole and soured cream on top if you like."]
'Curried kale & chickpea soup', ["1 tsp rapeseed or coconut oil","1 onion, chopped","1 tbsp grated ginger","2 garlic cloves, crushed","1 sweet potato (about 200g), peeled and cut into 2cm cubes","1 tsp turmeric","2 tsp ground cumin","2 tbsp medium or hot curry powder","400g can chickpeas, rinsed","150ml low-fat coconut milk","500ml vegetable stock (see tip, below)","160g kale, chopped","1 lime, juiced","1 red chilli, finely chopped (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a large pan and fry the onion for 5 mins. Add the ginger and garlic, fry for 1 min more, then stir in the sweet potato, spices and chickpeas. Cook for another 5 mins, adding a little water if the spices stick to the pan.","STEP 2","Pour in the coconut milk and 400ml of the stock, then bring to a simmer and cook for 8 mins. Season, then transfer a quarter of the soup to a blender and whizz until smooth. Pour in the reserved stock to loosen, if needed, then add back to the pan with the remaining soup. Stir in the kale and cook for 5 mins. Add the lime juice, then ladle into bowls and scatter over the chilli, if you like."]
'Red lentil & carrot soup', ["1 white onion, finely sliced","2 tsp olive oil","3 garlic cloves, sliced","2 carrots, scrubbed and diced","85g red lentils","1 vegetable stock cube, crumbled","generous sprigs parsley, chopped (about 2 tbsp) plus a few extra leaves"], ["STEP 1","Put the kettle on to boil while you finely slice the onion. Heat the oil in a medium pan, add the onion and fry for 2 mins while you slice the garlic and dice the carrots. Add them to the pan, and cook briefly over the heat.","STEP 2","Pour in 1 litre of the boiling water from the kettle, stir in the lentils and stock cube, then cover the pan and cook over a medium heat for 15 mins until the lentils are tender. Take off the heat and stir in the parsley. Ladle into bowls, and scatter with extra parsley leaves, if you like."]
'Chilled minty courgette soup', ["2 tbsp olive oil","1 onion , chopped","1kg courgettes , roughly chopped","½ tsp dried mint","1.3l vegetable stock (try Marigold vegetable bouillon powder)","3-4 sprigs of fresh mint","4 tbsp single cream"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a large saucepan, add the onion and cook gently for about 2-3 minutes until softened. Now add the courgettes and dried mint, and stir well to mix with the onion. Cover and cook over a gentle heat for about 10 minutes until the courgettes are softened but not coloured.","STEP 2","Pour in the stock and bring to the boil, then lower the heat to a gentle simmer. Strip the mint leaves off the stalks and drop them into the pan, then cover the pan and continue simmering gently for 20 minutes or until the courgettes are very tender. Remove from the heat and let the bubbles subside before blitzing in a food processor or blender until smooth (if you like a really smooth soup, simply pour it through a sieve after blitzing). Pour into a bowl and leave to cool, then cover and chill for at least 4 hours (or overnight).","STEP 3","To serve, taste and season with salt and pepper. Serve in chilled soup plates with a spoonful of cream drizzled in the middle."]
'Hot & sour broth with prawns', ["3 tbsp rice vinegar or white wine vinegar","500ml chicken stock","1 tbsp soy sauce","1-2 tbsp golden caster sugar","thumb-size piece ginger , peeled and thinly sliced","2 small hot red chillies , thinly sliced","3 spring onions , thinly sliced","300g small raw peeled prawns , from a sustainable source"], ["STEP 1","Put the vinegar, stock, soy sauce, sugar (start with 1 tbsp and add the second at the end if you want the soup sweeter), ginger, chillies and spring onions in a saucepan and bring to a simmer. Cook for 1 min, then add the prawns to heat through. Serve in small bowls or cups."]
'Supergreen soup with yogurt & pine nuts', ["2 tsp olive oil","1 onion , chopped","2 garlic cloves , crushed","1 potato (approx 250g), cut into small cubes","600ml vegetable stock","120g bag mixed watercress, rocket and spinach salad","150g pot  natural yogurt","20g pine nuts , toasted","chilli oil , to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a medium saucepan over a low-medium heat. Add the onion and a pinch of salt, then cook slowly, stirring occasionally, for 10\xa0mins until softened but not coloured. Add the garlic and cook for 1 min more.","STEP 2","Tip in the potato followed by the veg stock. Simmer for 10-12 mins until the potato is soft enough that a cutlery knife will slide in easily. Add the bag of salad and let it wilt for 1 min, then blitz the soup in a blender until it’s completely smooth.","STEP 3","Serve with a dollop of yogurt, some toasted pine nuts and a drizzle of chilli oil, if you like."]
'Cullen skink', ["1 tbsp unsalted butter","1 medium  onion","400g medium  potatoes  (about 2), peeled and cut into 1cm cubes","250g smoked haddock","250ml whole milk","½ small bunch of parsley or chives, finely chopped"], ["STEP 1","Melt the butter in a saucepan over a medium heat, then add the onion and fry for 5-8 mins until translucent but not browned. Add the potatoes and 300ml water and bring to the boil. Reduce the heat slightly and simmer for 10-15 mins.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, put the haddock in another pan and cover with the the milk. Cook gently for 5 mins, or until just tender. Remove the haddock from the milk with a slotted spoon (reserving the milk), transfer to a plate and leave to cool slightly. When cool enough to touch, flake into large pieces, removing any bones.","STEP 3","Put the reserved milk and flaked haddock in\xa0the\xa0pan with the potato mixture\xa0and cook for another 5 mins. Season and sprinkle over the parsley to serve."]
'Celeriac, hazelnut & truffle soup', ["1 tbsp olive oil","small bunch thyme","2 bay leaves","1 onion, chopped","1 fat garlic clove, chopped","1 celeriac (about 1kg), peeled and chopped","1 potato (about 200g), chopped","1l veg stock (check the label to ensure it’s vegan – we used Marigold)","100ml soya cream","50g blanched hazelnuts, toasted and roughly chopped","1 tbsp truffle oil, plus an extra drizzle to serve"], ["STEP 1","In a large saucepan, heat the oil over a low heat. Tie the thyme sprigs and bay leaves together with a piece of string and add them to the pan with the onion and a pinch of salt. Cook for about 10 mins until softened but not coloured.","STEP 2","Stir in the garlic and cook for 1 min more, then tip in the celeriac and potato. Give everything a good stir and season with a big pinch of salt and white pepper. Pour in the stock, bring to the boil, then simmer for around 30 mins until the vegetables are completely soft.","STEP 3","Discard the herbs, then stir through the cream, remove from the heat and blitz until completely smooth. Stir through 1/2 tbsp truffle oil at a time and taste for seasoning – the strength of the oil will vary, so it’s better to start with less oil and add a little at a time.","STEP 4","To serve, reheat the soup until piping hot, then ladle into bowls and top with the hazelnuts, some black pepper and an extra drizzle of truffle oil."]
'Spicy chilli bean soup', ["1 tbsp olive oil","1 large onion, finely chopped","1 garlic clove, crushed","1 tbsp tomato purée","1 tsp mild chilli powder","½ tsp ground cumin","400g can chopped tomatoes","500ml vegetable stock","400g can mixed beans, drained and rinsed","1 red pepper, cut into chunky dice","tortilla chips, to serve","4 limes wedges, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a deep saucepan and fry the chopped onion over a medium heat until tender. Add the garlic and tomato purée, stirring for 1-2 mins until combined. Sprinkle in the spices and cook for another 1 min.","STEP 2","Tip in the chopped tomatoes, half fill the can with water, and add to the pan. Pour in the stock and simmer on a medium heat for 10-15 mins, uncovered. Season, then whizz using a hand blender until smooth. Add the beans and red pepper, and cook for another 15 mins until the pepper is tender.","STEP 3","Serve in bowls topped with a small pile of tortilla chips and a lime wedge."]
'Cucumber, pea & lettuce soup', ["1 tsp rapeseed oil","small bunch spring onions , roughly chopped","1 cucumber , roughly chopped","1 large round lettuce , roughly chopped","225g frozen peas","4 tsp vegetable bouillon","4 tbsp bio yogurt (optional)","4 slices rye bread"], ["STEP 1","Boil 1.4 litres water in a kettle. Heat the oil in a large non-stick frying pan and cook the spring onions for 5 mins, stirring frequently, or until softened. Add the cucumber, lettuce and peas, then pour in the boiled water. Stir in the bouillon, cover and simmer for 10 mins or until the vegetables are soft but still bright green.","STEP 2","Blitz the mixture with a hand blender until smooth. Serve hot or cold, topped with yogurt (if you like), with rye bread alongside."]
'Rustic vegetable soup', ["1 tbsp rapeseed oil","1 large onion, chopped","2 carrots, chopped","2 celery sticks, chopped","50g dried red lentils","1½ l boiling vegetable bouillon (we used Marigold)","2 tbsp tomato purée","1 tbsp chopped fresh thyme","1 leek, finely sliced","175g bite-sized cauliflower florets","1 courgette, chopped","3 garlic cloves, finely chopped","½ large Savoy cabbage, stalks removed and leaves chopped","1 tbsp basil, chopped"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a large pan with a lid. Add the onion, carrots and celery and fry for 10 mins, stirring from time to time until they are starting to colour a little around the edges. Stir in the lentils and cook for 1 min more.","STEP 2","Pour in the hot bouillon, add the tomato purée and thyme and stir well. Add the leek, cauliflower, courgette, and garlic, bring to the boil, then cover and leave to simmer for 15 mins.","STEP 3","Add the cabbage and basil and cook for 5 mins more until the veg is just tender. Season with pepper, ladle into bowls and serve. Will keep in the fridge for a couple of days. Freezes well. Thaw, then reheat in a pan until piping hot."]
'Chorizo & chickpea soup', ["400g can chopped tomato","110g pack of  chorizo  sausage (unsliced)","140g wedge Savoy cabbage","sprinkling dried chilli flakes","410g can chickpea , drained and rinsed","1 chicken or vegetable stock  cube","crusty bread or garlic  bread, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Put a medium pan on the heat and tip in the tomatoes, followed by a can of water. While the tomatoes are heating, quickly chop the chorizo into chunky pieces (removing any skin) and shred the cabbage.","STEP 2","Pile the chorizo and cabbage into the pan with the chilli flakes and chickpeas, then crumble in the stock cube. Stir well, cover and leave to bubble over a high heat for 6 mins or until the cabbage is just tender. Ladle into bowls and eat with crusty or garlic bread."]
'Chunky butternut mulligatawny', ["2 tbsp olive or  rapeseed oil","2 onions , finely chopped","2 dessert apples , peeled and finely chopped","3 celery sticks, finely chopped","½ small  butternut squash , peeled, seeds removed, chopped into small pieces","2-3 heaped tbsp gluten-free curry powder (depending on how spicy you like it)","1 tbsp ground cinnamon","1 tbsp nigella seeds (also called black onion or kalonji seeds)","2 x 400g cans chopped tomatoes","1 ½l gluten-free chicken or vegetable stock","140g basmati rice","small pack  parsley , chopped","3 tbsp mango chutney , plus a little to serve, if you like (optional)","natural yogurt , to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in your largest saucepan. Add the onions, apples and celery with a pinch of salt. Cook for 10 mins, stirring now and then, until softened. Add the butternut squash, curry powder, cinnamon, nigella seeds and a grind of black pepper. Cook for 2 mins more, then stir in the tomatoes and stock. Cover with a lid and simmer for 15 mins.","STEP 2","By now the vegetables should be tender but not mushy. Stir in the rice, pop the lid back on and simmer for another 12 mins until the rice is cooked through. Taste and add more seasoning if needed. Stir through the parsley and mango chutney, then serve in bowls with yogurt and extra mango chutney on top, if you like."]
'Bone broth', ["1 meaty chicken carcass, plus any jellified roasting juices from it, skin and fat discarded","1 large onion , halved and sliced","zest and juice 1 lemon","2 bay leaves","1-2 red chillies , halved, deseeded and sliced","1 tsp ground coriander","½ tsp ground cumin","small pack coriander , stems and leaves chopped and separated","1 large garlic clove , finely grated","250g pouch wholegrain basmati rice"], ["STEP 1","Break the chicken carcass into a large pan and add the onion, 1.5 litres of water, the lemon juice and bay leaves. Cover and simmer for 40 mins. Remove from the heat and allow to cool slightly, to make things a bit easier to handle.","STEP 2","Place a colander over a bowl and scoop out all the bones into the colander. Pick through them, stripping off the chicken and returning it with any onion as you work your way down the pile of bones.","STEP 3","Return any broth from the bowl to the pan – and any jellified roasting juices – along with the chilli, ground coriander, cumin, coriander stems, lemon zest and garlic. Cook for a few mins until just bubbling – don’t overboil as you will spoil the delicate flavours. Taste, and season only if you need to. Meanwhile, heat the rice following pack instructions, then toss with the coriander leaves. Ladle the broth into bowls and top with the rice."]
'Cauliflower soup', ["1 large cauliflower (1.5kg), cut into florets","½ tbsp ground cumin","2 tbsp olive oil , plus extra for drizzling","4 thyme sprigs","1 onion , finely chopped","1 celery stick, finely chopped","1 garlic clove , crushed","750-850ml veg or chicken stock","100ml single cream","½ small bunch of parsley , finely chopped"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 220C/200C fan/gas 7. Toss the cauliflower florets in a roasting tin with 1 tbsp olive oil, the cumin and the thyme. Roast for 15 mins or until golden and tender. Discard the thyme.","STEP 2","Heat the remaining oil in a saucepan with the onion and celery and fry over a medium heat for 10 mins or until softened. Add the garlic and cook for 1 min. Stir through most of the cauliflower, reserving some to top the soup with later. Add 750ml of the stock to the pan and bring to a simmer. Cook for 10 mins.","STEP 3","Blitz the soup until smooth using a hand blender or food processor.\xa0Stir through the cream and season to taste. Add extra stock if\xa0you like your soup a little thinner. Ladle into bowls and top with the parsley, reserved cauliflower and an extra drizzle of olive oil."]
'Mushroom & potato soup', ["1 tbsp rapeseed oil","2 large onions , halved and thinly sliced","20g dried porcini mushrooms","3 tsp vegetable bouillon powder","300g chestnut mushrooms , chopped","3 garlic cloves , finely grated","300g potato , finely diced","2 tsp fresh thyme","4 carrots , finely diced","2 tbsp chopped parsley","8 tbsp bio yogurt","55g walnut pieces"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a large pan. Tip in the onions and fry for 10 mins until golden. Meanwhile, pour 1.2 litres boiling water over the dried mushrooms and stir in the bouillon.","STEP 2","Add the fresh mushrooms and garlic to the pan with the potatoes, thyme and carrots, and continue to fry until the mushrooms soften and start to brown.","STEP 3","Pour in the dried mushrooms and stock, cover the pan and leave to simmer for 20 mins. Stir in the parsley and plenty of pepper. Ladle into bowls and serve each portion topped with 2 tbsp yogurt and a quarter of the walnuts. The rest can be chilled and reheated the next day."]
'Red lentil, chickpea & chilli soup', ["2 tsp cumin seeds","large pinch chilli flakes","1 tbsp olive oil","1 red onion, chopped","140g red split lentils","850ml vegetable stock or water","400g can tomatoes, whole or chopped","200g can chickpeas or ½ a can, drained and rinsed (freeze leftovers)","small bunch coriander, roughly chopped (save a few leaves, to serve)","4 tbsp 0% Greek yogurt, to serve","2 tsp cumin seeds","large pinch chilli flakes","1 tbsp olive oil","1 red onion, chopped","140g red split lentils","850ml vegetable stock or water","400g can tomatoes, whole or chopped","200g can chickpeas or ½ a can, drained and rinsed (freeze leftovers)","small bunch coriander, roughly chopped (save a few leaves, to serve)","4 tbsp 0% Greek yogurt, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat a large saucepan and dry-fry 2 tsp cumin seeds and a large pinch of chilli flakes for 1 min, or until they start to jump around the pan and release their aromas.","STEP 2","Add 1 tbsp olive oil and 1 chopped red onion, and cook for 5 mins.","STEP 3","Stir in 140g red split lentils, 850ml vegetable stock or water and a 400g can\xa0tomatoes, then bring to the boil. Simmer for 15 mins until the lentils have softened.","STEP 4","Whizz the soup with a\xa0stick blender\xa0or in a food processor until it is a rough purée, pour back into the pan and add a 200g can drained and rinsed\xa0chickpeas.","STEP 5","Heat gently, season well and stir in a small bunch of chopped coriander, reserving a few leaves to serve. Finish with 4 tbsp 0% Greek yogurt and extra coriander leaves.","STEP 6","Heat a large saucepan and dry-fry 2 tsp cumin seeds and a large pinch of chilli flakes for 1 min, or until they start to jump around the pan and release their aromas.","STEP 7","Add 1 tbsp olive oil and 1 chopped red onion, and cook for 5 mins.","STEP 8","Stir in 140g red split lentils, 850ml vegetable stock or water and a 400g can\xa0tomatoes, then bring to the boil. Simmer for 15 mins until the lentils have softened.","STEP 9","Whizz the soup with a\xa0stick blender\xa0or in a food processor until it is a rough purée, pour back into the pan and add a 200g can drained and rinsed\xa0chickpeas.","STEP 10","Heat gently, season well and stir in a small bunch of chopped coriander, reserving a few leaves to serve. Finish with 4 tbsp 0% Greek yogurt and extra coriander leaves."]
'Cauliflower cheese soup', ["knob of butter","1 large onion, finely chopped","1 large cauliflower (about 900g/2lb), leaves trimmed and cut into florets","1 potato, peeled and cut into chunks","700ml vegetable stock (from a cube is fine)","400ml milk","100g mature cheddar, diced"], ["STEP 1","Heat the butter in a large saucepan. Tip in the onion and cook until softened, about 5 mins, stirring often. Add the cauliflower, potato, stock, milk and seasoning. Bring to the boil, then reduce the heat and leave to simmer for about 30 mins until the cauliflower is soft and the potato almost collapsing.","STEP 2","Whizz in a food processor or crush with a potato masher until you get a creamy, thick soup. Top up with more milk to thin a little if serving in mugs. You can make ahead up to 2 days in advance, cool, cover and leave in the fridge until needed, or freeze for up to 1 month. When ready to serve, warm through, ladle into mugs or bowls, top with the cheese pieces, then stir through before eating."]
'Rich tomato soup with pesto', ["1 tbsp butter or olive oil","2 garlic cloves, crushed","5 soft sun-dried or SunBlush tomatoes in oil, roughly chopped","3 x 400g cans plum tomatoes","500ml turkey or vegetable stock","1 tsp sugar, any type, or more to taste","142ml pot soured cream","125g pot fresh basil pesto","basil leaves, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat the butter or oil in a large pan, then add the garlic and soften for a few mins over a low heat. Add the sun-dried or SunBlush tomatoes, canned tomatoes, stock, sugar and seasoning, then bring to a simmer. Let the soup bubble for 10 mins until the tomatoes have broken down a little.","STEP 2","Whizz with a stick blender, adding half the pot of soured cream as you go. Taste and adjust the seasoning – add more sugar if you need to. Serve in bowls with 1 tbsp or so of the pesto swirled on top, a little more soured cream and scatter with basil leaves."]
'Potato & Savoy cabbage soup with bacon', ["1 onion","1 carrot","1 celery stick","2 garlic cloves","1 tbsp olive oil, plus extra to serve","550g floury potatoes, peeled and cut into small cubes","1l chicken or vegetable stock","8 rashers streaky bacon","a quarter medium Savoy cabbage (about 200g/8oz)"], ["STEP 1","Chop the onion, carrot, celery and garlic in a food processor. Heat the oil over a medium heat in a large saucepan. Add the vegetables and potatoes, season well, then reduce the heat and cover the pan. Gently cook for about 5 mins until starting to soften, then add the stock, turn up the heat and bring to the boil. Simmer for 5 mins more, or until all the vegetables are tender.","STEP 2","While the soup is cooking, grill or fry the bacon until crisp, then cut into strips. Shred the cabbage, discarding the core.","STEP 3","Whizz the soup in the food processor until smooth, then return to the pan and add the cabbage. Simmer for a few mins until the cabbage is just tender, then season to taste and serve scattered with the bacon."]
'Thai pumpkin soup', ["1.5kg  pumpkin or squash, peeled and roughly chopped","4 tsp sunflower oil","1 onion, sliced","1 tbsp grated ginger","1 lemongrass, bashed a little","3-4 tbsp  Thai red curry paste","400ml can  coconut milk","850ml vegetable stock","lime juice and sugar, for seasoning","1 red chilli, sliced, to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Toss the pumpkin or squash in a roasting tin with half the oil and seasoning, then roast for 30 mins until golden and tender.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, put the remaining oil in a pan with the onion, ginger and lemongrass. Gently cook for 8-10 mins until softened. Stir in the curry paste for 1 min, followed by the roasted pumpkin, all but 3 tbsp of the coconut milk and the stock. Bring to a simmer, cook for 5 mins, then fish out the lemongrass. Cool for a few mins, then whizz until smooth with a hand blender, or in a large blender in batches. Return to the pan to heat through, seasoning with salt, pepper, lime juice and sugar, if it needs it. Serve drizzled with the remaining coconut milk and scattered with chilli, if you like."]
'Turkey minestrone', ["2 tsp olive oil","100g smoked bacon lardons","1 red onion , finely chopped","1 carrot , finely chopped","1 celery stick , finely chopped","2 garlic cloves , finely chopped","2 bay leaves","2 thyme sprigs","300g celeriac (or any other root veg), cut into cubes","200g potato , cut into cubes","400g can borlotti beans , drained and rinsed","1 ½l chicken stock or turkey stock, (fresh is best)","350g cooked turkey","100g orzo","75g curly kale , shredded"], ["STEP 1","Heat 1 tsp of oil in a large saucepan. Add the bacon and fry over a medium-to-high heat for 4-5 mins or until golden, then set aside.","STEP 2","Put the remaining oil, the onion, carrot, celery and a pinch of salt in the pan. Cook gently over a low heat for 8-10 mins, stirring occasionally, until the veg is soft but not coloured. Add the garlic and herbs, and cook for 2 mins more","STEP 3","Tip in the celeriac, potato, borlotti beans and chicken stock. Bring to the boil, then simmer, uncovered, for 10-15 mins. Add the cooked turkey, orzo and the bacon, and cook for 10 mins.","STEP 4","Just before serving, tip in the kale, give everything a good stir and return to the heat for about 2 mins or until the kale has wilted."]
'Thai green chicken soup', ["2 tbsp sunflower oil","1 onion , finely chopped","500g pack skinless chicken thigh fillets, finely chopped","4 garlic cloves , finely sliced","285g jar Thai green curry paste","400ml can coconut milk","1 ¾l chicken stock","5 kaffir lime leaves","2 tbsp fish sauce","1 bunch spring onions , the white sliced on the diagonal and the green finely chopped","280g pack fine green bean , trimmed and halved","150g pack bamboo shoot","juice 2 limes , plus wedges to serve","small bunch basil"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in your largest pan, add the onion and fry for 3 mins to soften. Add the chicken and garlic, and cook until the chicken changes colour.","STEP 2","Add the curry paste, coconut milk, stock, lime leaves and fish sauce, then simmer for 12 mins. Add the chopped onion tops, green beans and bamboo shoots and cook for 4-6 mins, until the beans are just tender.","STEP 3","Meanwhile, put the lime juice and basil in a narrow jug and blitz with a hand blender to make a smooth green paste. Pour into the soup with the sliced spring onion and heat through. Serve with lime wedges for a light lunch or supper or as a make-ahead starter."]
'Spiced lentil & butternut squash soup', ["2 tbsp olive oil","2 onions, finely chopped","2 garlic cloves, crushed","¼ tsp hot chilli powder","1 tbsp ras el hanout","1 butternut squash, peeled and cut into 2cm pieces","100g red lentils","1l hot vegetable stock","1 small bunch coriander, leaves chopped, plus extra to serve","dukkah (see tip) and natural yogurt, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a large flameproof casserole dish or saucepan over a medium-high heat. Fry the onions with a pinch of salt for 7 mins, or until softened and just caramelised. Add the garlic, chilli and ras el hanout, and cook for 1 min more.","STEP 2","Stir in the squash and lentils. Pour over the stock and season to taste. Bring to the boil, then reduce the heat to a simmer and cook, covered, for 25 mins or until the squash is soft. Blitz the soup with a stick blender until smooth, then season to taste. To freeze, leave to cool completely and transfer to large freezerproof bags.","STEP 3","Stir in the coriander leaves and ladle the soup into bowls. Serve topped with the dukkah, yogurt\xa0and extra coriander leaves."]
'Pea & mint soup', ["1 bunch spring onions, trimmed and roughly chopped","1 medium potato, peeled and diced","1 garlic clove, crushed","850ml vegetable or chicken stock","900g young pea  in the pod (to give about 250g/9oz shelled peas)","4tbsp chopped fresh mint","large pinch caster sugar","1 tbsp fresh lemon  or lime juice","150ml buttermilk  or soured cream"], ["STEP 1","Put the spring onions into a large pan with the potato, garlic and stock. Bring to the boil, turn down the heat and simmer for 15 minutes or until the potato is very soft. For the garnish, blanch 3 tbsp of the shelled peas in boiling water for 2-3 minutes, drain, put in a bowl of cold water and set aside. Add the remaining peas to the soup base and simmer for 5 minutes – no longer, or you will lose the lovely fresh flavour of the peas.","STEP 2","Stir in the mint, sugar and lemon or lime juice, cool slightly then pour into a food processor or liquidiser and whizz until as smooth as you like. Stir in half the buttermilk or soured cream, taste and season with salt and pepper.","STEP 3","To serve the soup cold, cool quickly, then chill – you may need to add more stock to the soup before serving as it will thicken as it cools. To serve hot, return the soup to the rinsed-out pan and reheat without boiling (to prevent the buttermilk or soured cream from curdling).","STEP 4","Serve the soup in bowls, garnished with the remaining buttermilk and the drained peas."]
'Hearty pasta soup', ["1 tbsp olive oil","2 carrots, chopped","1 large onion, finely chopped","1l vegetable stock","400g can chopped tomato","200g frozen mixed peas  and beans","250g pack  fresh filled tortellini  (we used spinach and ricotta)","handful of basil leaves  (optional)","grated parmesan (or vegetarian alternative), to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat oil in a pan. Fry the carrots and onion for 5 mins until starting to soften. Add the stock and tomatoes, then simmer for 10 mins. Add the peas and beans with 5 mins to go.","STEP 2","Once veg is tender, stir in the pasta. Return to the boil and simmer for 2 mins until the pasta is just cooked. Stir in the basil, if using. Season, then serve in bowls topped with a sprinkling of Parmesan and slices of garlic bread."]
'Winter vegetable & lentil soup', ["85g dried red lentils","2 carrots, quartered lengthways then diced","3 sticks  celery, sliced","2  small leeks, sliced","2 tbsp tomato purée","1 tbsp fresh thyme leaves","3 large garlic cloves, chopped","1 tbsp vegetable bouillon powder","1 heaped tsp ground coriander"], ["STEP 1","Tip all the ingredients into a large pan. Pour over 1½ litres boiling water, then stir well.","STEP 2","Cover and leave to simmer for 30 mins until the vegetables and lentils are tender.","STEP 3","Ladle into bowls and eat straightaway, or if you like a really thick texture, blitz a third of the soup with a hand blender or in a food processor."]
'Bouillabaisse', ["1 leek, green top left whole, white finely sliced","small bunch fresh thyme","3 bay leaves","bunch parsley, stalks whole, leaves roughly chopped","2 strips of orange peel","1 mild red chilli","4 tbsp olive oil","2 onions, chopped","1 leek","1 fennel, fronds picked and reserved, fennel chopped","4 garlic cloves, minced","1 tbsp tomato purée","1 star anise","2 tbsp Pernod, optional, if you have it","4 large, ripe tomatoes, chopped","large pinch (⅓ tsp)  saffron strands","1 ½l fish stock","100g potato, one peeled piece","1kg of filleted mixed Mediterranean fish, each fillet cut into large chunks. (We used a mix of red and grey mullet, monkfish, John Dory and gurnard)","300g mussels, optional","2 garlic cloves","1 small chunk of red chilli (optional)","small pinch saffron","1 piece of potato, cooked in the broth, (see above)","1 egg yolk","100ml olive oil","1 tbsp lemon juice","½ baguette, thinly sliced","1 tbsp olive oil"], ["STEP 1","To make the croutons heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Lay the slices of bread on a flat baking tray in a single layer, drizzle with olive oil and bake for 15 mins until golden and crisp. Set aside – can be made a\xa0day ahead and kept in an airtight container.","STEP 2","Use a layer of the green part of the leek to wrap around and make a herb bundle with the thyme, bay, parsley stalks, orange peel and chilli. Tie everything together with kitchen string and set aside.","STEP 3","Heat the oil in a very large casserole dish or stock pot and throw in the onion, sliced leek and fennel and cook for about 10 mins until softened. Stir through the garlic and cook for 2 mins more, then add the\xa0herb bundle, tomato purée, star anise, Pernod if using, chopped tomatoes and saffron. Simmer and stir for a minute or two then pour over the fish stock. Season with salt and pepper, bring to a simmer, then\xa0add the piece of potato. Bubble everything gently\xa0for 30 mins until you have a thin tomatoey soup. When that\xa0piece of potato is on the brink of collapse, fish it out and set aside to make the rouille.","STEP 4","While the broth is simmering make the rouille by crushing the garlic, chilli and saffron with a pinch of salt in a mortar with a pestle. Mash in the cooked potato to make a sticky paste then whisk in the egg yolk and, very gradually, the olive oil until you make a mayonnaise-like sauce. Stir in the lemon juice and set aside.","STEP 5","Once the chunky\xa0tomato broth has cooked you have two options:\xa0for a rustic bouillabaisse, simply poach your fish in it along with\xa0the\xa0mussels, if you\'re using (just until they open)\xa0and serve. For a refined version, remove the herb bundle and star anise. Using a handheld or table-top blender, blitz the soup until smooth. Pass the soup through a sieve\xa0into a\xa0large, clean pan\xa0and bring to a gentle simmer. Starting with the densest fish, add the chunks to the broth and cook for 1 min\xa0before adding the next type. With the fish we used, the order was: monkfish, John Dory, grey mullet, snapper. When all the fish is in, scatter over the mussels, if using, and simmer everything for about 5 mins until just cooked and the mussels have opened.","STEP 6","Use a slotted spoon to carefully scoop the fish and mussels out onto a warmed serving platter, moisten with just a little broth and scatter over the chopped parsley. Bring everything to the table.\xa0Some people eat it as two courses, serving the broth with croutons and rouille first,\xa0then the fish spooned into the same bowl. Others simply serve it as a fish stew. Whichever way you choose the rouille is there to be stirred into the broth to thicken and give it a kick."]
'Spicy roasted parsnip soup', ["2 tbsp olive oil","1 tsp coriander seeds","1 tsp cumin seeds, plus extra to garnish","½ tsp ground turmeric","½ tsp mustard seeds","1 large  onion, cut into 8 chunks","2 garlic cloves","675g parsnips, diced","2 plum tomatoes, quartered","1.2l vegetable stock","1 tbsp lemon juice"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 220C/fan 200C/gas 7.","STEP 2","In a bowl, mix together 2 tbsp olive oil and 1 tsp coriander seeds, 1 tsp cumin seeds, ½ tsp ground turmeric and ½ tsp mustard seeds.","STEP 3","Add 1 large onion, cut into 8 chunks, 2 garlic cloves, 675g parsnips, diced, and 2 quartered plum tomatoes and mix well.","STEP 4","Spread over a heavy baking sheet, then roast for 30 mins until tender.","STEP 5","Spoon into a food processor or liquidiser with 600ml vegetable stock and process until smooth.","STEP 6","Pour into a pan with the remaining\xa0 600ml vegetable stock, season, then heat until barely simmering.","STEP 7","Remove from the heat and stir in 1 tbsp lemon juice. Garnish with cumin seeds."]
'Artichoke soup with Parmesan sticks', ["600g Jerusalem artichoke , scrubbed and quartered (the artichokes can also be peeled)","1  small potato  (about 100-140g/4-5 oz) quartered","1  large onion , chopped","600ml  vegetable chicken stock  (use bought fresh, or make up with a stock cube)","450ml milk","grissini sticks","3 heaped tbsp  finely grated Parmesan (or vegetarian alternative)","142ml  carton single or whipping cream","1-2 tbsp milk","2 tsp  snipped chives , optional"], ["STEP 1","Up to a month before, put all the soup ingredients in a pan and bring to a simmer. Continue to simmer, covered, for about 20-30 mins or until the artichokes and potatoes have become very tender. Liquidise the soup in batches until completely smooth. If you want to thin it, add more stock. Pour the soup into a rigid plastic container and leave to cool before covering and freezing.","STEP 2","The day before serving, transfer the soup to the fridge to defrost overnight.","STEP 3","On the day, heat oven to 190C/fan 170C/gas 5. Heat the soup and check the seasoning. While the soup is warming, put the grissini sticks on a baking tray. Scatter them with 1 tbsp of the Parmesan and put in the oven until warm and the cheese has melted, about 8-10 mins.","STEP 4","Meanwhile, pour the cream into a small pan and simmer to reduce by a third. Stir in remaining Parmesan and let it melt. (For a little extra body, add a tbsp or two of soup.) Stir in 1-2 tbsp milk to cool it down, then blitz with a stick blender, if you like, for a frothy finish. (To avoid any splashes, transfer the cream to a larger pan or deep bowl to do this.) Ladle the soup between soup bowls, topping each with the warmed cream and a sprinkling of chives if using. Serve with the warm grissini sticks."]
'Carrot & coriander soup', ["1 tbsp vegetable oil","1 onion, chopped","1 tsp ground coriander","1 potato, chopped","450g carrots, peeled and chopped","1.2l vegetable or chicken stock","handful coriander (about ½ a supermarket packet)"], ["STEP 1","Heat 1 tbsp vegetable oil in a\xa0large pan, add 1 chopped onion, then fry for 5 mins until softened.","STEP 2","Stir in 1 tsp ground coriander and 1 chopped potato, then cook for 1 min.","STEP 3","Add the 450g peeled and chopped carrots and 1.2l vegetable or chicken stock, bring to the boil, then reduce the heat.","STEP 4","Cover and cook for 20 mins until the carrots are tender.","STEP 5","Tip into a food processor\xa0with a handful of coriander\xa0then blitz until smooth (you may need to do this in two batches). Return to pan, taste, add salt if necessary, then reheat to serve."]
'Green pesto minestrone', ["2 tbsp olive oil","1 large onion , finely chopped","2 celery sticks , finely chopped","1.4l vegetable stock","2 small lemons , zested and juiced","170g orzo","120g frozen peas","250g frozen spinach","50g pesto","garlic flatbreads , to serve (optional)","60g parmesan (or vegetarian alternative), grated"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a large saucepan, add the onion, celery and a pinch of salt, and fry for 8 mins until soft. Add the stock with the zest and juice of the lemons, and season. Stir in the orzo and cook for 5 mins, then add the peas and spinach, and cook for a further 5 mins. Swirl though the pesto and season.","STEP 2","Heat the flatbreads, if using, following pack instructions. Ladle the soup generously into bowls and top with a handful of parmesan. Serve with the flatbread to dip."]
'Minestrone in minutes', ["1l hot  vegetable stock","400g tin chopped tomato","100g thin spaghetti , broken into short lengths","350g frozen mixed vegetable","4 tbsp pesto","drizzle of olive oil","coarsely grated vegetarian parmesan-style cheese , to serve"], ["STEP 1","Bring the stock to the boil with the tomatoes, then add the spaghetti and cook for 6 mins or until done. A few minutes before the pasta is ready, add the vegetables and bring back to the boil. Simmer for 2 mins until everything is cooked.","STEP 2","Serve in bowls drizzled with pesto and oil, sprinkled with parmesan."]
'Moroccan chickpea soup', ["1 tbsp olive oil","1 onion, chopped","2 celery sticks, chopped","2 tsp ground cumin","600ml hot vegetable stock","400g can chopped plum tomatoes  with garlic","400g can chickpeas, rinsed and drained","100g frozen broad beans","zest and juice ½ lemon","large handful coriander or parsley and flatbread, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a large saucepan, then fry the onion and celery gently for 10 mins until softened, stirring frequently. Tip in the cumin and fry for another min.","STEP 2","Turn up the heat, then add the stock, tomatoes and chickpeas, plus a good grind of black pepper. Simmer for 8 mins. Throw in broad beans and lemon juice, cook for a further 2 mins. Season to taste, then top with a sprinkling of lemon zest and chopped herbs. Serve with flatbread."]
'Summer pistou', ["1 tbsp rapeseed oil","2 leeks , finely sliced","1 large courgette , finely diced","1l boiling vegetable stock (made from scratch or with reduced-salt bouillon)","400g can cannellini or haricot beans , drained","200g green beans , chopped","3 tomatoes , chopped","3 garlic cloves , finely chopped","small pack basil","40g freshly grated parmesan"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a large pan and fry the leeks and courgette for 5 mins to soften. Pour in the stock, add three-quarters of the haricot beans with the green beans, half the tomatoes, and simmer for 5-8 mins until the vegetables are tender.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, blitz the remaining beans and tomatoes, the garlic and basil in a food processor (or in a bowl with a stick blender) until smooth, then stir in the Parmesan. Stir the sauce into the soup, cook for 1 min, then ladle half into bowls or pour into a flask for a packed lunch. Chill the remainder. Will keep for a couple of days."]
'Minted pea soup', ["1 bunch  spring onions","good knob of  butter","300g frozen minted peas","750ml hot  vegetable stock","3 tbsp crème fraîche"], ["STEP 1","Thinly slice the spring onions, reserving some of the green tops for garnish. Heat the butter, fry the spring onions for 1 min until slightly softened. Add the peas and stock, then bring to the boil.","STEP 2","Simmer for 5 mins, then whizz half the soup in a food processor. Return to the pan with the crème fraîche. Reheat gently, taste and add pepper, and salt if it needs it. Ladle into small bowls or cups and saucers, then sprinkle with the reserved spring onion tops."]
'Herby broccoli & pea soup', ["1 tbsp rapeseed oil","1 onion , finely chopped","1 large garlic clove , crushed","400g broccoli , chopped into small florets","300g frozen peas","200g chard , chopped","1l low-salt veg stock","½ small bunch of basil , chopped","small bunch of dill , chopped","1 lemon , zested and juiced","2 tbsp pumpkin seeds , toasted"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a large saucepan. Add the onion and fry for 8 mins until soft and translucent. Add the garlic and cook for 1 min more. Tip in the broccoli, peas and chard, then pour over the stock and bring the mixture to the boil. Reduce the heat to a simmer, cover and cook for\xa025 mins.","STEP 2","Stir through the herbs, lemon zest and juice, then blitz the soup with a stick blender until completely smooth. Ladle into bowls and serve with the toasted pumpkin seeds scattered over the top."]
'Chinese pork one-pot', ["400g pork tenderloin , cut into long thin strips","600ml chicken stock","1 tbsp soy sauce","2 tsp Chinese five-spice powder","large knob of ginger , peeled and cut into matchsticks","200g pack  baby leaf green  quartered","1 red chilli , deseeded and finely chopped or 1 tsp chilli flakes","bunch  spring onions , whites and greens sliced"], ["STEP 1","Tip all the ingredients, except the spring onion greens, into a large saucepan, put the lid on and bring to a gentle simmer. Cook, without boiling, for about 8 mins, until the pork has changed colour and the greens are cooked, but still a bit crunchy. Ladle into bowls, scatter with the spring onion and serve with boiled rice or noodles on the side."]
'Butternut soup with crispy sage & apple croutons', ["1 tbsp olive oil","1 large onion , chopped","1 garlic clove , chopped","1 butternut squash , about 1kg, peeled, deseeded and chopped","3 tbsp madeira or dry Sherry","500ml gluten-free vegetable stock , plus a little extra if necessary","1 tsp chopped sage , plus 20 small leaves, cleaned and dried","sunflower oil , for frying","1 tbsp olive oil","1 large eating apple , peeled, cored and diced","a few pinches of golden caster sugar"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a large pan, add the onion and fry for 5 mins. Add the garlic and squash, and cook for 5 mins more. Pour in the Madeira and stock, stir in the chopped sage, then cover and simmer for 20 mins until the squash is tender.","STEP 2","Blitz with a hand blender or in a food processor until completely smooth. Allow to cool in the pan, then chill until ready to serve. Will keep for 2 days or freeze for 3 months. To make the crispy sage, heat some oil (a depth of about 2cm) in a small pan, then drop in the sage leaves until they are crisp – you will need to do this in batches. Drain on kitchen paper. Will keep for several hours.","STEP 3","Just before serving, reheat the soup in a pan. The texture should be quite thick and velvety, but thin it with a little stock if it is too thick.","STEP 4","For the apple croutons, heat the oil in a large pan, add the apple and fry until starting to soften. Sprinkle with the sugar and stir until lightly caramelised.","STEP 5","To serve, ladle the soup into small bowls and top with the apple, sage and a grinding of black pepper."]
'Mexican-style bean soup with shredded chicken & lime', ["2 tsp rapeseed oil","1 large onion , finely chopped","1 red pepper , cut into chunks","2 garlic cloves , chopped","2 tsp mild chilli powder","1 tsp ground coriander","1 tsp ground cumin","400g can chopped tomatoes","400g can black beans","1 tsp vegetable bouillon powder","1 cooked skinless chicken breast , about 125g, shredded","handful chopped coriander","1 lime , juiced","½ red chilli , deseeded and finely chopped (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a medium pan, add the onion and pepper, and fry, stirring frequently, for 10 mins. Stir in the garlic and spices, then tip in the tomatoes and beans with their liquid, half a can of water and the bouillon powder. Simmer, covered, for 15 mins.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, tip the chicken into a bowl, add the coriander and lime juice with a little chilli (if using, or see tip below for guacamole alternative) and toss well. Ladle the soup into two bowls, top with the chicken and serve."]
'Curried lentil, parsnip & apple soup', ["2 tbsp sunflower oil","3 tbsp medium curry paste","2 medium onions , roughly chopped","500g parsnips  (around 5 medium parsnips), peeled and cut into chunks","140g dried  red lentils","2 Bramley apples  (about 400g), peeled, cored and cut into chunks","1 ½l vegetable or chicken stock , made with 1 stock cube","natural yogurt , to serve (optional)","chopped coriander , to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a large saucepan. Fry the curry paste and onions together over a medium heat for 3 mins, stirring. Add the parsnips, lentils and apple pieces. Pour over the stock and bring to a simmer. Reduce the heat slightly and cook for 30 mins, stirring occasionally, until the parsnips are very soft and the lentils mushy.","STEP 2","Remove from the heat and blitz with a stick blender until smooth. (Or leave to cool for a few minutes, then blend in a food processor.) Adjust the seasoning to taste. Heat through gently, then ladle into deep bowls. Serve with natural yogurt and garnish with fresh coriander, if you like. (For freezing instructions see below left.)"]
'Squash & nigella seed soup', ["2 tbsp olive oil","1 onion","2 tsp nigella seeds","pinch chilli powder","800g squash , peeled, deseeded and cut into chunks","1 potato , cubed","850ml low-sodium vegetable stock","small bunch flat-leaf parsley"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a large pan, add the onion, then fry until lightly coloured. Add the nigella seeds and chilli, then fry for 1 min. Tip in the squash, potato and stock, then bring to the boil. Stir well, cover, then simmer for 20 mins, or until the vegetables are tender.","STEP 2","Purée the soup in batches, adding a handful of parsley with each batch. Return the soup to the pan, then reheat. The soup can be frozen for up to 1 month."]
'Chickpea tagine soup', ["2 red peppers","1 tbsp rapeseed oil","1 red onion , thinly sliced","2 large garlic cloves , crushed","2 tsp ground coriander","1 tsp ground cumin","2 tbsp rose harissa paste","2 x 400g cans chickpeas , drained and rinsed","1 ½l low-salt veg stock","150g kale , chopped","1 lemon , zested and juiced","50g dried apricots , finely chopped","1⁄2 small bunch parsley , finely chopped","fat-free natural yogurt , to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat the grill to its highest setting. Halve and deseed the peppers, then lay cut-side down on a baking sheet lined with foil. Grill for 10-15 mins, or until blistered and softened. Leave until cool enough to handle, then remove and discard the skins. Slice the roasted peppers\xa0into thin strips.","STEP 2","Heat the oil in a large saucepan over a low heat. Fry the onion for 8-10 mins until softened. Stir through the garlic, coriander, cumin and harissa paste and cook for 1 min more. Add the chickpeas and stock, bring to the boil and simmer for 15 mins, covered.","STEP 3","Stir the peppers through the soup with the kale, lemon zest and juice, and apricots and cook, covered, for another 5 mins. Ladle the soup into bowls and serve with the chopped parsley scattered over and a dollop of yogurt, if you like."]
'Mumsy’s vegetable soup', ["200g sourdough bread, cut into croutons","1 tbsp caraway seeds","3 tbsp olive oil","1 garlic clove, chopped","1 carrot, chopped","1 potato, chopped","600ml vegetable stock (we use bouillon)","100g cherry tomatoes, halved","400g can chopped tomatoes","pinch of golden caster sugar","1 bouquet garni (2 bay leaves, 1 rosemary sprig and 2 thyme sprigs tied together with string)","1 celery stick, chopped","200g cauliflower, cut into florets","150g white cabbage, shredded","1 tsp Worcestershire sauce","2 tsp mushroom ketchup"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Put the bread on a baking tray with the caraway seeds, half the oil and some sea salt, and bake for 10-15 mins or until golden and crisp. Set aside.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, heat the remaining oil in a large saucepan over a medium heat. Add the garlic, carrot and potato and cook for 5 mins, stirring frequently, until a little softened.","STEP 3","Add the stock, tomatoes, sugar, bouquet garni, celery and seasoning and bring to a rolling boil. Reduce the heat, simmer for 10 mins, then add the cauliflower and cabbage. Cook for 15 mins until the veg is tender.","STEP 4","Stir in the Worcestershire sauce and mushroom ketchup. Remove the bouquet garni and serve the soup in bowls with the caraway croutons."]
'Cabbage soup', ["2 tbsp olive oil","1 large onion , finely chopped","2 celery sticks , finely chopped","1 large carrot , finely chopped","70g smoked pancetta , diced (optional)","1 large Savoy cabbage , shredded","2 fat garlic cloves , crushed","1 heaped tsp sweet smoked paprika","1 tbsp finely chopped rosemary","1 x 400g can chopped tomatoes","1.7l hot vegetable stock","1 x 400g can chickpeas , drained and rinsed","shaved parmesan (or vegetarian alternative), to serve (optional)","crusty bread , to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a casserole pot over a low heat. Add the onion, celery and carrot, along with a generous pinch of salt, and fry gently for 15 mins, or until the veg begins to soften. If you\'re using pancetta, add it to the pan, turn up the heat and fry for a few mins more until turning golden brown. Tip in the cabbage and fry for 5 mins, then stir through the garlic, paprika and rosemary and cook for 1 min more.","STEP 2","Tip the chopped tomatoes and stock into the pan. Bring to a simmer, then cook, uncovered, for 30 mins, adding the chickpeas for the final 10 mins. Season generously with salt and black pepper.","STEP 3","Ladle the soup into six deep bowls. Serve with the shaved parmesan and crusty bread, if you like."]
'Wild garlic & nettle soup', ["1 tbsp rapeseed oil , plus extra for drizzling","25g butter","1 onion , finely diced","1 leek , finely diced","2 celery sticks, thinly sliced","1 carrot , finely diced","1 small potato , peeled and diced","1.2l good-quality vegetable stock","300g young nettle leaves","200g wild garlic leaves (keep any flowers if you have them)","3 tbsp milk"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil and butter in a large saucepan. Add the onion, leek, celery, carrot, potato and a good pinch of salt, and stir until everything is well coated. Cover and sweat gently for 15-20 mins, stirring every so often to make sure that the vegetables don’t catch on the bottom of the pan.","STEP 2","Pour in the stock and simmer for 10 mins. Add the nettles in several batches, stirring, then add the wild garlic leaves and simmer for 2 mins.","STEP 3","Remove from the heat and blend using a stick blender or tip into a blender. Return to the heat and stir through the milk, then taste for seasoning. Ladle into bowls and drizzle over a little extra oil, then top with a few wild garlic flowers, if you have them."]
'Healthy mushroom soup', ["30g dried porcini mushrooms","1½ tbsp olive oil","20g unsalted butter","250g mushrooms , roughly chopped","1 medium carrot , peeled and finely diced","1 celery stick , finely diced","200g pearl barley","800ml chicken, beef or veal stock","small bunch of dill , leaves chopped","soured cream and crusty bread, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Cover the porcini mushrooms with 750ml boiling water and leave to soak.","STEP 2","Heat the olive oil and butter in a large saucepan and add the chopped mushrooms, carrot and celery. Fry over a medium-high heat for around 10 mins or until the carrots are beginning to turn dark gold. Add the barley and stir the mixture for about 2 mins, then pour in the stock.","STEP 3","Drain the porcini, retaining the soaking liquor, and cut up any large bits. Add these to the pan, along with the liquor. Bring to the boil, then turn the heat down and simmer for 30 mins (it might take a bit longer) until the barley is tender. Taste for seasoning. Stir in the dill. Serve with a dollop of soured cream on top of each bowlful and crusty bread on the side."]
'Corned beef hash', ["500g potato, peeled and chopped","2 tbsp vegetable oil","1 onion, roughly chopped","340g can corned beef, cut into cubes","2 tbsp Worcestershire sauce","baked beans and a little curly parsley, roughly chopped, to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Put the potatoes in a pan, cover with cold water and bring to the boil. Cook for about 6-7 mins, then drain.","STEP 2","Heat the oil in a non-stick frying pan and cook the onion for 3-4 mins over a medium heat. Add the potatoes and corned beef, and push down with a spatula to crisp up, cooking for about 5 mins. Turn the mixture over, trying not to break up the meat and potatoes too much, then add the Worcestershire sauce. Cook for another 5 mins, pushing down to crisp the base again. Season a little, then serve with baked beans and a sprinkling of parsley, if you like."]
'Caribbean beef patties', ["drizzle of oil","1 small onion , finely chopped","2 garlic cloves , crushed","250g beef mince","1 potato , cut into 1cm/0.5in cubes","2 tsp turmeric","2 tbsp tomato purée","few thyme sprigs","2 tbsp hot pepper sauce","500g block shortcrust pastry","1 egg , beaten","green salad , to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a pan, add the onion and cook for 5 mins. Add the garlic and beef, turn up the heat and cook until the meat is browned. Add the potato, half the turmeric, the purée and thyme, plus 200ml water. Cover and simmer for 15 mins, then remove the lid and cook for 5 mins more. Add the hot pepper sauce and leave to cool.","STEP 2","Heat oven to 220C/200C fan/gas 7. Roll out the pastry to the thickness of a £1 coin. Cut out 6 x 15cm circles, using a small plate as a guide. Divide the mince between the circles, piling it up on one side. Mix the egg with the remaining turmeric, brush around the edge of each circle, then fold over and use a fork to seal the edges. Arrange on a baking tray lined with baking parchment, brush with a little more egg and bake for 20-25 mins. Serve with a green salad."]
'Chipotle chicken & slaw', ["1 tbsp rapeseed oil","2 tbsp chipotle paste","1½ tbsp honey","8 chicken drumsticks","1 lime , zested and juiced","1 small avocado , stoned","2 tbsp fat-free Greek yogurt","125g each red and white cabbage , both shredded","1 large carrot , cut into matchsticks","3 spring onions , sliced","4 corn on the cobs , steamed, to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Whisk the oil, chipotle paste and honey together in a large bowl. Add the chicken and toss to coat, then spread out on a non-stick baking tray. Roast for 30 mins, turning halfway through.","STEP 2","Put the lime zest and juice, avocado flesh, yogurt and a good pinch of salt into a blender and blitz until completely smooth. Put the sauce in a large bowl with the cabbage, carrot and spring onion and toss to combine.","STEP 3","Serve the drumsticks with the slaw and steamed corn, if you like."]
'Sticky chicken drumsticks & sesame rice salad', ["4 chicken drumsticks","2 tbsp clear honey , plus 1tsp","2 tbsp tamari (or soy sauce if not gluten free)","3 tbsp vegetable oil","2 tbsp sesame oil","120g basmati rice","70g kale , chopped","juice 2 limes","100g radishes , halved","1 tbsp sesame seeds"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Put the drumsticks in a roasting tin. Mix 2 tbsp honey, the tamari, 1 tbsp veg oil and 1 tbsp sesame oil in a bowl, then pour over the chicken – make sure each piece is covered. Roast for 25-30 mins.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, cover the rice with 240ml water and bring to the boil. Cook for 8-10 mins until tender. Massage the kale with 1 tbsp veg oil for 5 mins until softening (this makes it less chewy). Drizzle over the lime juice, remaining sesame oil and honey, and season. Add the radishes and set aside.","STEP 3","Fry the rice in the remaining veg oil in a non-stick pan to dry out. Add to the kale, and toss to combine.","STEP 4","Serve the drumsticks with the salad and scatter over the sesame seeds."]
'Chicken burrito', ["1 tbsp vegetable oil","1 red or white onion, or 4 spring onions, chopped","400g mixed vegetables of your choice (we used carrots, red pepper and sweetcorn)","200g leftover chicken, chopped into small chunks","2 x 250g packs ready-cooked lime & coriander rice","400g can  red kidney beans in chilli sauce","6 large wraps","1 avocado, chopped","100g grated cheddar","1 egg, beaten","soured cream, to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a large pan. Add the onion and cook for 5 mins until soft, then add your chosen veggies and continue cooking for another 5-10 mins or until tender. Add the leftover meat, the rice and beans, along with the sauce from the can. Stir everything together and cook for 5 mins until piping hot.","STEP 2","Heat another frying pan, or a griddle pan, until hot, and heat oven to 140C/120C fan/gas 2. Now assemble the burritos. Warm a wrap for 10 secs on the hot pan (keep the pan hot, you’ll need to use it again).","STEP 3","Pile roughly a sixth of the rice mixture onto the centre of the wrap. Top with a little avocado and some cheese, then brush beaten egg around the edge. Fold the ends over the filling, then fold in the sides, like an envelope.","STEP 4","Flatten a little to a parcel, then place, seam-side down, in the hot pan. Cook for 2 mins until the underside has sealed shut and is toasted a golden brown, flip over and cook for a few mins more.","STEP 5","Keep the burrito warm in the oven while you continue assembling and cooking the remaining burritos. Serve with soured cream, if you like."]
'Sticky Chinese chicken traybake', ["8 chicken thighs, skin on and bone in","4 tbsp hoisin sauce","2 tsp sesame oil","2 tbsp clear honey","1 ½ tsp Chinese five-spice powder","thumb-sized knob of ginger, grated","2 garlic cloves, grated","bunch spring onions, chopped","50g cashew nuts, toasted","cooked brown rice, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Arrange the chicken thighs in a large roasting tin and slash the skin 2-3 times on each thigh. Mix together the hoisin, sesame oil, honey, five-spice, ginger, garlic and some seasoning. Pour over the chicken and toss to coat – you could now marinate the chicken for 2 hrs, or overnight if you have time. Roast, skin-side up, for 35 mins, basting at least once.","STEP 2","Stir through the cashew nuts and sprinkle the spring onions over the chicken. Return to the oven for 5 mins, then serve with brown rice."]
'Veggie yaki udon', ["1½ tbsp sesame oil","1 red onion , cut into thin wedges","160g mangetout","70g baby corn , halved","2 baby pak choi , quartered","3 spring onions , sliced","1 large garlic clove , crushed","½ tbsp mild curry powder","4 tsp low-salt soy sauce","300g ready-to-cook udon noodles","1 tbsp pickled sushi ginger , chopped, plus 2 tbsp of the brine"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a non-stick frying pan or wok over a high heat. Add the onion and fry for 5 mins. Stir in the mangetout, corn, pak choi and spring onions and cook for 5 mins more. Add the garlic, curry powder and soy sauce, and cook for another minute.","STEP 2","Add the udon noodles along with the ginger and reserved brine, and stir in 2-3 tbsp hot water until the noodles are heated through. Divide between bowls and serve."]
'Sesame paneer wraps', ["4 tbsp chilli sauce , or to taste (not to be confused with sweet chilli sauce or hot sauce, such as Tabasco; we used Lingham’s, which is mild, sweet and spicy)","100g natural yogurt","2 x 225g packs paneer , each cut into 10 cubes","100g pack sesame seeds","2 tbsp sunflower oil","1 carrot , peeled and grated","½ cucumber , halved, deseeded and sliced into batons","2 Baby Gem lettuces , shredded","4 tortillas wraps, warmed following pack instructions"], ["STEP 1","Mix 1 tsp of the chilli sauce with the yogurt and some seasoning, and set side. Brush the paneer cubes with the remaining chilli sauce and roll each cube in the sesame seeds.","STEP 2","Heat the oil in a large frying pan over a medium heat and fry the paneer in batches for 5-8 mins or until golden all over. Turn the cubes frequently, as the seeds can catch easily. Drain on kitchen paper, then serve with the chilli yogurt, carrot, cucumber, lettuce and warm wraps."]
'5-minute mocha pots', ["200g milk or dark chocolate with coffee, broken into chunks","300ml pot double cream","1 tsp vanilla extract","2 tbsp crème fraîche"], ["STEP 1","Melt the chocolate in the microwave for 2 mins, stirring halfway through, or over a pan of gently simmering water. Leave to cool a little.","STEP 2","Using an electric whisk, whip the double cream with the vanilla in a bowl until lightly whipped. Fold in the cooled, melted chocolate until fully combined.","STEP 3","Split the mixture between four small bowls or ramekins and serve topped with a dollop of crème fraîche. If you aren’t serving straight away, chill in the fridge and then add the crème fraîche just before bringing to the table."]
'Speedy Mediterranean gnocchi', ["400g gnocchi","200g chargrilled vegetables (from the deli counter - I used chargrilled peppers, aubergines, artichokes and semi-dried tomatoes)","2 tbsp red pesto","a handful of basil leaves","parmesan or pecorino (or vegetarian alternative), to serve"], ["STEP 1","Boil a large pan of salted water. Add the gnocchi, cook for 2 mins or until it rises to the surface, then drain and tip back into the pan with a splash of reserved cooking water.","STEP 2","Add the chargrilled veg, chopped into pieces if large, red pesto and basil leaves. Serve with shavings of Parmesan or pecorino (or vegetarian alternative)."]
'Niçoise-style pizza', ["500g pack ciabatta bread mix","4 tbsp red pesto","½ red onion , thinly sliced","50g green beans , trimmed and halved","100g brie , sliced into strips","6 anchovies","8 black pitted olives , halved","handful basil leaves"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 220C/200C fan/gas 7. Put a large baking sheet, about 38 x 28cm, in the oven to heat up. Make up the bread mix following pack instructions. Roll out the dough on a large sheet of baking parchment to a rough rectangle of about 35 x 25cm.","STEP 2","Spread the pesto over the dough, then scatter on the red onions. In a chevron pattern, arrange the beans and cheese over the top. Add the anchovies along the middle and dot with the olives. Put the pizza, on the baking parchment, onto the hot baking sheet. Turn the oven down to 200C/180C fan/gas 6 and bake for 15-18 mins. Scatter with basil leaves just before serving."]
'Peanut butter chicken', ["2tbsp vegetable oil","8 skinless boneless chicken thighs, cut into chunks","1 onion,  finely chopped","3 garlic cloves, crushed","2 red chillies, finely sliced (deseeded if you don\'t like it too hot)","2tsp fresh ginger, grated","2tbsp garam masala","100g smooth peanut butter","400ml coconut milk","400g can chopped tomatoes","coriander , ½ roughly chopped, ½ leaves picked","roasted peanuts, to serve","cooked basmati rice, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat 1 tbsp of the oil in a deep frying pan over a medium heat. Brown the chicken in batches, setting aside once golden. Fry the onion for 8 minutes until softened. Then add the garlic, chilli and ginger and fry in the other 1 tbsp oil for 1 min. Add the garam masala and fry for 1 min more.","STEP 2","Stir in the peanut butter, coconut milk and tomatoes, and bring to a simmer. Return the chicken to the pan and add the chopped coriander. Cook for 30 mins until the sauce thickens and the chicken is cooked through.","STEP 3","Serve with the remaining coriander, roasted peanuts and rice, if you like."]
'Smoked haddock & creamed corn curry', ["325g can  sweetcorn","1 tbsp vegetable oil","1 onion , roughly chopped","1 tbsp mild curry powder","1 garlic clove , crushed","1 x 50 sachet  creamed coconut , chopped","4 frozen  smoked haddock fillets","cooked rice , to serve"], ["STEP 1","In a blender, whizz the sweetcorn, along with any liquid from the can, into a rough purée and set aside.","STEP 2","Heat the oil in a large lidded frying pan and cook the onion for 2-3 mins to soften. Add the curry powder and garlic and cook for 1 min more until fragrant.","STEP 3","Tip the creamed coconut into the pan with 300ml water, stirring until the creamed coconut dissolves. Add the puréed sweetcorn and bring to the boil. Place the haddock fillets in the sauce, then reduce the heat to a simmer. Cover and cook for 20 mins, or until the fish is cooked through. Season and serve with rice."]
'Minty roast veg & hummus salad', ["4 parsnips , peeled and cut into wedges","4 carrots , cut into wedges","2 tsp cumin seeds","400g can chickpeas , drained","2 tbsp vegetable oil","500g pack cooked beetroot (not in vinegar), drained and cut into wedges","2 tbsp clear honey","200g pot hummus","2 tbsp white wine vinegar","small bunch mint , leaves picked","200g block Greek-style salad cheese or feta"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Toss the parsnips, carrots, cumin seeds and chickpeas with the oil and some seasoning in a large roasting tin. Cook for 30 mins, tossing halfway through cooking.","STEP 2","Add the beetroot to the tin and drizzle over the honey, then return to the oven for 10 mins. Spread the hummus thinly over a large platter, or divide between 4 dinner plates. When the veg is ready, drizzle with the vinegar and toss together in the tin. Tip the roasted vegetables on top of the hummus, scatter over the mint and cheese, drizzle with any juices from the tin and serve."]
'Chorizo & rosemary pearl barley risotto', ["225 chorizo ring, sliced","1 onion, finely chopped","1 garlic clove, finely chopped","300g pearl barley","400g can chopped tomato with sliced olives","1l hot chicken stock, made with 1 stock cube","2 stalks rosemary, leaves chopped"], ["STEP 1","Heat a non-stick frying pan over a medium heat and fry the chorizo for 3-4 mins until it turns golden and releases its oil. Remove with a slotted spoon and set aside.","STEP 2","Add the onion and garlic to the pan, and cook for 3-4 mins, until they begin to soften. Add the pearl barley and stir well to coat in the oil, before tipping in the chopped tomatoes and the chicken stock. Bring just to the boil, then turn down to a simmer and cook for 30 mins, stirring occasionally, until all the liquid has been absorbed and the pearl barley is tender. You may need to top up with a little extra water as you go.","STEP 3","Season and stir in the rosemary and chorizo to serve."]
'Pork souvlaki', ["400g lean pork shoulder, cut into 2cm chunks","1 tbsp olive oil","½ tbsp dried oregano","1 lemon , zested and juiced","½ tsp hot paprika","100ml fat-free yogurt","1 small garlic clove , grated","½ cucumber , trimmed and grated","2 red peppers , deseeded and cut into chunks","2 Little Gem lettuce , leaves separated","chilli sauce , to serve (optional)","flatbreads , warmed, to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Put the pork in a large bowl with the oil, oregano, lemon zest and juice and paprika as well as a good pinch of salt. Toss everything together to combine and leave to marinate for 10 mins.","STEP 2","Combine the yogurt, garlic and cucumber together in a bowl. Season with salt and set aside.","STEP 3","Heat the grill to high. Thread the marinated pork and the peppers on four metal skewers, alternating between the pork and peppers as you go. Place on a non-stick baking sheet and grill for 3-4 mins on each side, or until cooked through and golden brown.","STEP 4","Serve with the lettuce, yogurt mixture and chilli sauce, and flatbreads, if you like."]
'Easy sausage & fennel risotto', ["2 tbsp olive oil","1 onion , finely chopped","1 fennel bulb , finely sliced","2 pork sausages","½ tsp fennel seeds , crushed","2 large garlic cloves , crushed","3 thyme sprigs, leaves finely chopped, plus extra to serve","400g risotto rice","100ml white wine","1.4 litres hot chicken stock","70g parmesan , finely grated","1 lemon , zested and juiced"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a large saucepan, add the onion and fennel and fry for 10 mins or until softened. Raise the heat. Squeeze the sausagemeat out of the skins straight into the pan and fry for 5 mins, or until turning golden brown. Stir through the fennel seeds, garlic and thyme and fry for a further minute.","STEP 2","Tip in the rice and fry for 1 min. Pour the wine into the pan and boil the liquid until reduced by half.\xa0Add half the stock and cook until absorbed, stirring constantly. Add the remaining stock, a ladleful at a time, and cook until al dente and not too thick in consistency, stirring constantly for 20-25 mins. Season with black pepper.","STEP 3","Stir through the cheese and lemon, then spoon into four bowls and scatter over the extra thyme leaves to finish."]
'Coconut & mango sponge', ["425g can sliced  mango in syrup, drained","200g butter , softened","225g golden caster sugar","4 large eggs","200g self-raising flour","50g desiccated coconut , plus 3 tbsp for sprinkling","140g Greek-style coconut yogurt"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Grease and line a 20 x 30cm baking tin with 2 strips of criss-crossed baking parchment. Dry the mango pieces on some kitchen paper, then chop into 3cm pieces and set aside.","STEP 2","Place the butter and sugar into a bowl, and whisk until smooth and creamy. Add the eggs, one at a time, beating well after each addition. Use a spatula to fold through the flour and coconut, then the mango pieces and yogurt. Scrape the mixture into your tin and smooth over the surface, then sprinkle with a little extra coconut. Bake for 30 mins until risen and golden and a skewer inserted into the centre of the cake comes out clean. Cool for 10 mins in the tin, then transfer to a wire rack. This cake is delicious served warm with an extra blob of coconut yogurt, or just as good cold. Keeps in a tin for up to 3 days."]
'Creamy cider & sausage braise with apples & mash', ["500g Maris Piper or King Edward potatoes , peeled and cut into chunks","4 tbsp crème fraîche","knob of  butter","½ tbsp olive oil","2 apples , cored and each cut into 12 wedges","8 sausages","1 onion , sliced","500ml medium-dry  cider","1 tbsp English mustard"], ["STEP 1","Put the potatoes in a large pan, cover with water and bring to the boil. Cook for 15-20 mins until tender, then drain and mash with 2 tbsp of the crème fraîche. Season to taste.","STEP 2","While the potatoes cook, heat the butter and oil in a large lidded frying pan. When the butter is just foaming, add the apple wedges. Cook over a medium heat for about 2 mins each side, or until just turning golden. Remove from the pan with a slotted spoon and set aside.","STEP 3","Add the sausages and onion to the pan and cook for 6-7 mins – turn the sausages so that they brown all over, and stir the onion so it doesn’t catch. Pour in the cider and bring to the boil, then cover and cook for 10 mins.","STEP 4","Stir in the mustard, remaining crème fraîche and the apples. Season to taste and serve with the mash."]
'Jacket potato with whipped feta & sumac', ["1 baking potato","2 tsp olive oil","½ tsp garlic salt","50g feta","50g Greek yogurt","1 roasted red peppers from a jar (about 25g), finely chopped","½ tsp sumac","few basil leaves , to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 220C/200C fan/ gas 6. Prick the potato all over with a fork and bake for 1 hr until it is golden outside and soft inside. Mix 1 tsp olive oil with the garlic salt. Cut a deep cross into the top of the jacket, drizzle the garlic oil into the cross and rub it all over the outside. Return to the oven and bake for 15 mins more until the edges are golden and crispy.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, crumble the feta into a bowl, add the yogurt and whisk together until creamy. Stir in the red pepper with a good grind of black pepper and spoon the whipped feta into the jacket. Sprinkle with the sumac, drizzle over the remaining 1 tsp olive oil and scatter a few torn basil leaves on top, if you like."]
'Chilli con carne jackets', ["4 baking potatoes","2 tbsp olive oil","1 large onion , finely chopped","400g pork mince","1 tbsp chipotle paste","400g can chopped tomatoes","1 chicken stock cube","300ml pot soured cream","¼ small pack chives , snipped","mixed leaves , to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6 and prick the potatoes all over with a fork. Use 1 tbsp of the oil to rub over the potatoes and place on a baking sheet in the oven for about 1 hr until cooked through.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, make the chilli. Put the remaining oil in a deep frying pan over a medium heat. Add the onion and cook for about 10 mins until softened. Add the mince, breaking up with a wooden spoon and stirring until turning pale. Stir through the chipotle paste, cook for 1 min, then tip in the tomatoes, crumble over the stock cube and season well. Cover and simmer over a gentle heat with the lid on for about 40 mins, stirring occasionally.","STEP 3","Remove the lid from the chilli and cook for 10 mins more. Once the potatoes are cooked, halve them and top with the chilli, a dollop of soured cream and a sprinkling of chives. Serve with mixed leaves, if you like."]
'Spiced koftas with honey & chickpeas', ["1 ½ tsp fennel seeds","500g lamb mince","1 ½ tbsp ras el hanout","2 tbsp pine nuts , toasted and roughly chopped","2 x 400g cans chickpeas , drained and rinsed","2 tbsp olive oil","2 tbsp honey","80g Greek yogurt","2 tbsp tahini","1 lemon , 1/2 juiced, 1/2 cut into wedges to serve","25g parsley , roughly chopped, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Using a pestle and morter, crush the fennel seeds. In a large bowl, combine the crushed seeds, lamb, ras el hanout and pine nuts, and season well. Divide the mixture into eight equal egg-shaped koftas.","STEP 2","Tip the chickpeas into an ovenproof dish, season to taste and put in the oven while you fry the koftas. Heat 1 tbsp of the oil in a frying pan over a medium heat. Add the koftas and gently fry for 5 mins, turning from time to time, until evenly browned. Remove from the pan with a slotted spoon and set aside on a plate.","STEP 3","Remove the chickpeas from the oven, add the koftas to the dish, then pour over the rest of the oil and the honey, and return to the oven for 15 mins.","STEP 4","In a bowl, combine the yogurt, tahini and lemon juice with 70-100ml water and season well. Serve the koftas and chickpeas topped with parsley and a good drizzle of the creamy dressing, with the lemon wedges on the side."]
'Frying pan pizza bianco with mushrooms & egg', ["175g self-raising flour","2 tsp oil , plus a drizzle for frying","1 garlic clove , thinly sliced","4 rosemary sprigs, chopped","140g mushrooms , sliced","85g light cream cheese","1 egg","good pinch of chilli flakes"], ["STEP 1","In a large bowl, mix the flour with the oil, 85ml water and a pinch of salt to make a dough. Tip onto the work surface and knead for 1-2 mins to bring together into a smooth ball, then return to the bowl, cover with a tea towel and set aside.","STEP 2","Heat a drizzle of oil in a flameproof frying pan, roughly 22cm wide. Add the garlic and most of the rosemary and sizzle for 1-2 mins until just turning golden. Add the mushrooms and cook for 10 mins or until golden and tender. Season and tip out onto a plate. Shape the dough into a thin disc roughly the same size as your pan – you can do this with your hands, no need to use a rolling pin. Place in the pan and cook for 4-5 mins over a low-medium heat, until the underside is golden. Use a fish slice to flip over, then cook for another 4-5 mins.","STEP 3","Heat the grill to high. Season the cream cheese and spread over the pizza. Top with the mushrooms, leaving space in the centre for the egg. Crack the egg into the space and season, then place the pan under the grill for 3-4 mins until the white has set but the yolk is still a little runny. Sprinkle with the chilli flakes and remaining rosemary before serving."]
'Fish & chip traybake', ["2 large sweet potatoes , cut into thin wedges","1 tbsp rapeseed oil","4 tbsp fat-free natural yogurt","2 tbsp low-fat mayonnaise","3 cornichons , finely chopped, plus 1 tbsp of the brine","1 shallot , finely chopped","1 tbsp finely chopped dill , plus extra to serve","300g frozen peas","50ml milk","1 tbsp finely chopped mint","4 cod or pollock loin fillets","1 lemon , cut into wedges, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 220C/200C fan/gas 8. Toss the sweet potatoes with the oil and some seasoning on a baking tray. Roast for 20 mins.","STEP 2","Combine the yogurt, mayonnaise, cornichons and reserved brine, the shallot and dill with 1 tbsp cold water in a small bowl and set aside.","STEP 3","Meanwhile, put the peas in a pan with the milk, bring to a simmer and cook for 5 mins. Blitz the mixture using a hand blender until roughly puréed. Stir in the mint and season to taste. Set aside.","STEP 4","Add the cod or pollock to the baking tray with the sweet potatoes, season and cook for 10-15 mins more, or until cooked through. Warm through the pea mixture. Scatter over some dill and serve the traybake with the yogurt tartare and the mushy peas."]
'Bombay lamb wraps', ["1 tbsp vegetable oil","1 large red onion , chopped","3 fat garlic cloves , crushed","200g frozen lamb mince","3 tbsp curry paste (we used tikka)","400g can chopped tomatoes","2 large potatoes , cut into 2cm/0.75in cubes","250g frozen peas","8 flour wraps or chapatis , warmed","140g natural yogurt"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a large pan, add the onion and cook for a few mins to soften. Add the garlic, stir for 1 min, then add the frozen mince. Cook until defrosted and nicely browned, then stir in the curry paste, tomatoes, potatoes and half a can of water. Season well, then cover with a lid and simmer for 20 mins or until the potatoes are nearly cooked.","STEP 2","Remove the lid and simmer for a further 10-15 mins until the liquid has reduced and the sauce clings to the potatoes and mince. Add the peas, stir through until defrosted, then serve with the warm wraps and yogurt."]
'Cheesy ham & broccoli pasta', ["300g pasta (we used conchiglie)","1 head of broccoli, cut into small florets","1 tbsp oil","1 onion, finely chopped","2 garlic cloves, crushed","250g ham, cut into chunks (get a nice thick slice from the deli counter)","300ml pot double cream","1 tbsp English mustard","140g mature cheddar, grated"], ["STEP 1","Bring a large pan of water to the boil and cook the pasta following pack instructions, adding the broccoli florets to the pan for the final 4 mins. Drain and set aside.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, make the sauce. Heat the oil in a large pan and cook the onion for 5 mins to soften, then stir in the garlic and cook for 1 min more. Stir in the ham, cream and mustard, then bring to the boil. Add the pasta and broccoli, then stir in the cheese, coating everything in the sauce."]
'Butternut squash & goat’s cheese spaghetti', ["1 garlic bulb","1 tbsp olive oil","1 large butternut squash , peeled, deseeded and cut into small cubes","350g spaghetti or linguine","small bunch sage , leaves only","100g goat\'s cheese , crumbled","50g toasted pine nuts"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Cut off the top third of the garlic bulb and discard. Drizzle the garlic with ½ tsp of the oil, season, then wrap in foil. Toss the squash with the remaining oil and some seasoning, then spread over a large, shallow baking tray. Add the garlic parcel to the tray and roast for 30 mins or until the squash is soft and starting to caramelise.","STEP 2","After 20 mins roasting time, boil the pasta following pack instructions. When the squash is ready, unwrap the garlic and carefully squeeze out the soft cloves. Drain the pasta, toss with the squash, garlic, sage and goat’s cheese. Sprinkle over the pine nuts and serve."]
'Pilchard puttanesca', ["300g spaghetti","1 tbsp olive oil","1 onion , finely chopped","2 garlic cloves , crushed","1 red chilli , deseeded and finely chopped","1 tbsp tomato purée","425g can  pilchard in tomato sauce","70g pack dried  black olive with herbs (we used Crespo), roughly chopped","shaved parmesan , to serve"], ["STEP 1","Cook the pasta following pack instructions. Heat the oil in a non-stick frying pan and cook the onion, garlic and chilli for 3-4 mins to soften. Stir in the tomato purée and cook for 1 min, then add the pilchards with their sauce. Cook, breaking up the fish with a wooden spoon, then add the olives and continue to cook for a few more mins.","STEP 2","Drain the pasta and add to the pan with 2-3 tbsp of the cooking water. Toss everything together well, then divide between plates and serve, scattered with Parmesan."]
'Sichuan-style pork & green bean stir-fry', ["100g basmati rice","200g green bean , topped and tailed, then halved","1 ½ tbsp sunflower oil","140g pork mince","4 tsp dark soy sauce","2 tsp rice wine","1 tsp caster sugar","¼ tsp Sichuan pepper , lightly crushed using a pestle and mortar","1 red chilli , halved and sliced","4 fat garlic cloves , finely chopped","1 small knob of  ginger , finely chopped","3 spring onions , 2 finely chopped, 1 sliced for garnish","2 tsp sesame oil"], ["STEP 1","Cook the rice following pack instructions. Boil the beans for 4 mins, then drain under cold water, pat dry and set aside.","STEP 2","In a large non-stick wok or frying pan, heat 1 tbsp of the oil. Add the pork mince and fry for a few mins, breaking up into small pieces with the back of a spoon. Stir in half the soy, the rice wine and sugar and cook for 30 secs more. When the meat is cooked through, tip onto a plate.","STEP 3","Heat the remaining oil in the pan. Add the pepper, chilli, garlic, ginger and chopped onions, and stir-fry for 2 mins until ginger and garlic are softened. Tip in the beans, heat through, then add the mince – stir-fry for 2 mins until hot. Stir in the rest of the soy and sesame oil. Scatter with spring onions and serve with rice."]
'Jumbo sausage roll with salsa beans', ["400g sausagemeat , or pack of 8 sausages, squeezed from their skins","2 tbsp dried mixed herbs","300g jar hot salsa dip","1 egg , beaten","375g ready-rolled puff pastry sheet","3 x 400g cans cannellini or haricot beans (or a mixture), drained","400g can chopped tomatoes","1 green chilli , thinly sliced (deseeded if you don\'t like it too hot)"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6 and line a baking tray with baking parchment or foil. In a large bowl, mix together the sausagemeat, herbs, half the salsa and roughly half the egg until well combined.","STEP 2","Unroll the pastry sheet on your baking tray. Pile the sausage mixture onto one side of the pastry – along the longer side – leaving a gap of 4cm around the edge. Brush a little of the egg around the edges, then fold the pastry over the filling. Press the edges together with a fork and score a few air holes through the top with a knife (to let steam escape). Brush with the remaining egg and bake for 40 mins.","STEP 3","Meanwhile, tip the beans, tomatoes, remaining salsa and some seasoning into a saucepan and cover with a lid. Simmer for 20 mins or until the sauce is thick and clings to the beans. To serve, scatter the beans with the chilli and serve with slices of sausage roll."]
'Spaghetti puttanesca', ["3 tbsp olive oil","1 onion, finely chopped","2 large garlic cloves, crushed","½ tsp chilli flakes (optional)","400g can chopped tomatoes","5 anchovy fillets, finely chopped","120g pitted black olives","2 tbsp capers, drained","300g dried spaghetti","½ small bunch of parsley, finely chopped"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a non-stick pan over a medium-low heat. Add the onion along with a generous pinch of salt and fry for 10 mins, or until soft. Add the garlic and chilli, if using, and cook for a further minute.","STEP 2","Stir the tomatoes, anchovies, olives and capers into the onion, bring to a gentle simmer and cook, uncovered, for 15 mins. Season to taste.","STEP 3","Meanwhile, bring a large pan of salted water to the boil. Cook the spaghetti following pack instructions, then drain and toss with the sauce and parsley."]
'Polenta & mushroom tart', ["25g butter , plus extra for greasing","850ml vegetable stock","200g quick-cook polenta","50g parmesan (or vegetarian alternative), grated","2 rosemary sprigs, leaves finely chopped","500g chestnut mushrooms , halved","small bunch thyme , leaves only","2 tbsp olive oil","125g ball mozzarella , drained","large handful rocket","1 tsp balsamic vinegar"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Grease and line a large baking tray with baking parchment. Bring the stock to the boil in a large saucepan, then slowly pour in the polenta, whisking all the time. Bring it to the boil and bubble for 8 mins, whisking continuously. Remove from the heat and stir in the cheese, butter, rosemary and plenty of seasoning. Spread the polenta over the lined tray and bake for 30 mins.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, mix the mushrooms with the thyme and some seasoning. Heat a splash of oil in a large frying pan and fry the mushrooms in a couple of batches until golden. Tear the mozzarella into pieces and pat dry with kitchen paper. Top the baked polenta with the mushrooms and mozzarella, then bake again for 10 mins or until the cheese is melted and bubbling. Scatter the rocket over the tart and drizzle with the balsamic vinegar."]
'Spicy oven-baked chicken & chips', ["1 tbsp Cajun seasoning","2 tbsp vegetable oil","zest and juice 1  lime","750g large  potato , cut into chips","1kg chicken wing","green salad or coleslaw and  ketchup , to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. In a bowl, whisk together the Cajun seasoning, vegetable oil, lime zest and juice. Toss the chips, wings and Cajun mixture together in batches, so that everything is well coated.","STEP 2","Cover a large baking sheet with foil, then arrange the chips around the outside and the wings in the middle. Season and bake for 20 mins, then turn the chips and return to the oven for a further 20-25 mins until the chips and wings are golden. Serve with green salad, or coleslaw and ketchup."]
'Chestnut mushroom, fennel & bacon fusilli', ["50ml olive oil , plus 1 tbsp","2 fennel bulbs , finely sliced","2 onions , finely sliced","4 garlic cloves , crushed","2 red chillies , deseeded and finely sliced","4 tbsp tomato purée","250g pack streaky bacon , diced","350g fusilli","280g baby chestnut mushrooms , sliced","small pack parsley , roughly chopped, to serve","parmesan , grated, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Bring a large saucepan of salted water to the boil. Heat 1 tbsp oil in a large pan over a medium heat and fry the fennel and onion for 15 mins, or until softened. Add the garlic and chilli, and cook for 1 min, then add the tomato purée and stir for 1 min more. Toss in the bacon and fry for 5-6 mins.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, cook the pasta according to pack instructions. Add the mushrooms to the frying pan, stir and cover for 8\xa0mins, or until the mushrooms are soft.","STEP 3","Drain the pasta, adding a ladle of the cooking water to the sauce. Tip in the pasta and stir to coat. Add the rest of the oil and scatter over the parsley and Parmesan."]
'Pistachio lamb koftas with apricot relish', ["2 ½ tbsp olive oil","3 red onions , 2 1/2 thinly sliced, 1/2 grated","400g lamb mince","1 tbsp ras el hanout","85g pistachios , roughly chopped","½ small pack flat-leaf parsley , roughly chopped","4 tbsp good-quality apricot jam","zest and juice 1 lemon","2 carrots , cut into skinny matchsticks","4 round wholemeal pitta breads , split and warmed","4 tbsp Greek-style yogurt , to serve"], ["STEP 1","Put 1 1/2 tbsp olive oil in a frying pan, add most of the sliced onions with some seasoning and cook over a medium heat for about 15 mins until soft and golden.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, heat the grill to high. In a large bowl, combine the mince, grated onion, ras el hanout, most of the pistachios, half of the parsley and some seasoning. Divide the mixture into 8 and shape into patties. Place on a baking tray and brush with 1/2 tbsp oil. Grill for about 10 mins, turning once, until browned and cooked through.","STEP 3","Add the apricot jam, a large pinch of zest and half the lemon juice to the cooked sliced onions, bubble down until thick, then set aside. To make the salad, mix the carrots, reserved sliced onions and remaining parsley in a bowl, then toss in the remaining lemon juice and olive oil and some seasoning. To serve, spoon the apricot relish into the pittas. Then add the koftas, salad, yogurt and remaining pistachios. Alternatively, serve the pittas open with the filling piled on top."]
'Masala frittata with avocado salsa', ["2 tbsp rapeseed oil","3 onions, 2½ thinly sliced, ½ finely chopped","1 tbsp Madras curry paste","500g cherry tomatoes, halved","1 red chilli, deseeded and finely chopped","small pack coriander, roughly chopped","8 large eggs, beaten","1 avocado, stoned, peeled and cubed","juice 1 lemon"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in a medium non-stick, ovenproof frying pan. Tip in the sliced onions and cook over a medium heat for about 10 mins until soft and golden. Add the Madras paste and fry for 1 min more, then tip in half the tomatoes and half the chilli. Cook until the mixture is thick and the tomatoes have all burst.","STEP 2","Heat the grill to high. Add half the coriander to the eggs and season, then pour over the spicy onion mixture. Stir gently once or twice, then cook over a low heat for 8-10 mins until almost set. Transfer to the grill for 3-5 mins until set.","STEP 3","To make the salsa, mix the avocado, remaining chilli and tomatoes, chopped onion, remaining coriander and the lemon juice together, then season and serve with the frittata."]
'Smoked mackerel chowder with hedgehog garlic bread', ["4 garlic cloves , crushed","50g butter , plus a large knob for the chowder, softened","1 small round loaf of bread","1 tsp vegetable oil , for cooking","4 celery sticks, finely chopped, plus a few leaves to serve","1 onion , finely chopped","3 tbsp plain flour","600ml whole milk","2 large potatoes , cut into cubes","200g pack smoked peppered mackerel , flaked","200g frozen sweetcorn"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 220C/200C fan/gas 7. Mash the garlic with 50g butter. Slice the bread first one way, then the other (in a hedgehog pattern), but do not cut all the way through. Stuff the crevices with garlic butter, then wrap loosely in foil, leaving the top open to crisp, and bake for 20 mins while you make the chowder.","STEP 2","Heat a knob of butter in a saucepan with the oil. Tip in the celery and onion, cook for 5 mins or until soft, then add the flour and mix to a paste. Pour in the milk, a little at a time, and cook until smooth and the consistency of double cream. Add the potatoes and half the mackerel, cover and simmer for 15 mins until the potatoes are cooked.","STEP 3","Flake the remaining mackerel, add to the chowder with the sweetcorn and simmer for 1-2 mins until the sweetcorn is cooked. Splash in a little water if it is too thick. Ladle into bowls, scatter over the celery leaves and serve with the bread for dunking."]
'Prawn tikka masala', ["1 large onion , roughly chopped","1 thumb-sized piece ginger , peeled and grated","2 large garlic cloves","1 tbsp rapeseed oil","2-3 tbsp tikka curry paste","400g can chopped tomatoes","2 tbsp tomato purée","½ tbsp light brown soft sugar","3 cardamom pods , bashed","200g brown basmati rice","3 tbsp ground almonds","300g raw king prawns","1 tbsp double cream","½ bunch of coriander , roughly chopped","naan breads , warmed, to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Put the onion, ginger and garlic in a food processor and blitz to a smooth paste. Heat the oil in a large flameproof casserole dish or pan over a medium heat. Add the onion paste and fry for 8 mins or until lightly golden. Stir in the curry paste and fry for 1 min more. Add the tomatoes, tomato purée, sugar and cardamom pods. Bring to a simmer and cook, covered, for another 10 mins.","STEP 2","Cook the rice following pack instructions.","STEP 3","Scoop the cardamom out of the curry sauce and discard, then blitz with a hand blender, or in a clean food processor. Return to the pan, add the almonds and prawns, and cook for 5 mins. Season to taste and stir through the cream and coriander. Serve with the rice and naan breads, if you like."]
'Crispy cod fingers with wedges & dill slaw', ["3 large sweet potatoes (700g), scrubbed and cut into wedges","½ tbsp sunflower oil , plus a little extra","¼ large red cabbage","½ medium red onion , finely sliced","6 large cornichons , quartered","3 tbsp Greek yogurt or mayonnaise","25g dill , finely chopped","4 skinned  cod fillets (160g per fillet)","2 large eggs","100g fresh breadcrumbs"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. In a bowl, toss the wedges with the oil, 1 tsp salt and 1/4 tsp pepper. Transfer to a baking sheet and roast for 25-30 mins, turning halfway through. The wedges should be crisp and golden brown.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, make the slaw. Remove the cabbage’s white core and discard. Slice the leaves as finely as possible and put in a large mixing bowl with the onion and cornichons. In another bowl, combine the yogurt or mayonnaise with the dill and 2 tbsp of the cornichons’ pickling liquid. Mix the dressing with the other slaw ingredients until everything is well coated, then set aside.","STEP 3","Heat grill to high. Slice each cod fillet into two or three fingers. Beat the eggs lightly in a shallow bowl and tip the breadcrumbs into a separate bowl with a good pinch of salt and pepper. Dip each cod finger in the egg and then in the breadcrumbs, and place on an oiled baking sheet. Grill for 6-7 mins or until cooked through and golden. Serve with the crispy wedges and a generous helping of the dill pickle slaw."]
'Sausage ragu', ["3 tbsp olive oil","1 onion, finely chopped","2 large garlic cloves, crushed","¼ tsp chilli flakes","2 rosemary sprigs, leaves finely chopped","2 x 400g cans chopped tomatoes","1 tbsp brown sugar","6 pork sausages","150ml whole milk","1 lemon, zested","350g rigatoni pasta","grated parmesan and ½ small bunch parsley, leaves roughly chopped, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat 2 tbsp of the oil in a saucepan over a medium heat. Fry the onion with a pinch of salt for 7 mins. Add the garlic, chilli and rosemary, and cook for 1 min more. Tip in the tomatoes and sugar, and simmer for 20 mins.","STEP 2","Heat the remaining oil in a medium frying pan over a medium heat. Squeeze the sausagemeat from the skins and fry, breaking it up with a wooden spoon, for 5-7 mins until golden. Add to the sauce with the milk and lemon zest, then simmer for a further 5 mins. To freeze, leave to cool completely and transfer to large freezerproof bags.","STEP 3","Cook the pasta following pack instructions. Drain and toss with the sauce. Scatter over the parmesan and parsley leaves to serve."]
'Aubergine katsu curry', ["4 tbsp plain flour","2 aubergines , sliced into 0.5cm discs","100g dried breadcrumbs (see tip, below left, for how to make your own to save money)","4 tbsp vegetable oil","250g basmati rice","1 large onion , finely chopped","4 garlic cloves , crushed","3 tbsp curry powder","2 tbsp clear honey","400ml can coconut milk","1 large cucumber"], ["STEP 1","In a large bowl, combine 3 tbsp flour and enough water to make a runny paste, then season and add the aubergines, tossing until they are all coated. Tip the breadcrumbs onto a plate and dip in each aubergine slice, turning to coat and pressing down to help the crumbs stick.","STEP 2","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Heat a drizzle of oil in a frying pan. Cook the aubergine slices in batches for 5 mins each side or until tender, adding a little more oil between batches. Transfer the slices to a baking tray as you go. Once all the aubergine slices are browned, place the tray in the oven and cook for 10-15 mins while you make the sauce. Cook the rice following pack instructions.","STEP 3","Wipe out the pan and heat another drizzle of oil. Add the onion and cook for a few mins to soften. Stir in the garlic and curry powder for 1 min, then add the remaining 1 tbsp flour and the honey, and stir to a paste. Splash in the coconut milk, a little at a time, stirring to make a smooth sauce, then simmer over a low heat for 10 mins, adding a splash of water if it gets too thick. Peel the cucumber into long strips with a peeler. Drain the rice and serve with the crispy aubergine slices, curry sauce and cucumber ribbons."]
'Sweet potato & sprout hash with poached eggs', ["2 large sweet potatoes , cut into chunks","2 tsp olive oil","2 red onions , thinly sliced","300g Brussels sprouts , thinly sliced","grating of nutmeg","3 eggs"], ["STEP 1","Put the sweet potatoes in a bowl, cover with cling film and microwave on high for 5 mins until tender but still holding their shape. Uncover the bowl and leave to cool a little.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, heat the oil in a wide non-stick frying pan and add the onions. Cook for 5-8 mins until starting to caramelise. Add the sprouts and stir-fry over a high heat until softened. Push the sprouts and onions to one side of the pan and add the sweet potatoes, squashing them down in the pan with the back of a spatula. Leave undisturbed for 5 mins until starting to crisp on the underside. Season, add the nutmeg, mix in the sprouts and onions, and flip the potato over, trying not to break it up too much. Cook for a further 5 mins until really crispy.","STEP 3","Meanwhile, poach 3 eggs in a pan of barely simmering water. Serve the hash topped with poached eggs."]
'Chicken & cider fricassée with parsley croûtes', ["2 tbsp olive oil","2 whole chickens (1.5kg-2kg each), each jointed into 8 pieces, or 16 bone-in chicken pieces)","300g smoked  streaky bacon , chopped","2 onions , finely chopped","2 carrots , finely chopped","2 celery stalks, finely chopped","500g pack  chestnut mushroom , quartered","4 tbsp plain flour","500ml bottle dry cider","1 ½l chicken stock","5 sprigs thyme","2 bay leaves","150ml double cream","2 tbsp English mustard","small pack  tarragon leaves, chopped","large pack curly parsley , leaves very finely chopped, stalks reserved for the chicken","100ml olive oil","1 baguette , sliced into rounds"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oil in your largest flameproof casserole or deep pan. Season the chicken and brown in batches. Transfer to a plate. Reduce the heat and add the bacon to the pan. Fry until golden and crisp, then set aside with the chicken. Add the onions, carrots, and celery to the pan, scraping up any browned bits with a wooden spoon. Fry over a low heat until soft and starting to brown.","STEP 2","Add the mushrooms and continue to cook for a further 4-5 mins. Stir in the flour until it disappears, then stir in the cider and stock and bring to the boil, scraping any bits stuck to the bottom of the pan. At this stage, if you haven’t got enough room to add back all the chicken and bacon, split the sauce between two pans.","STEP 3","Tie the thyme, parsley stalks (from amount used for croûtes) and bay leaves together with kitchen string (in two bunches if you’ve had to split the sauce) and add to the casserole along with the chicken and bacon. Bring to a simmer. Cover and cook for 1 hr 15 mins until the chicken is tender and coming away from the bone.","STEP 4","Carefully lift out the cooked chicken and cover with foil to keep warm. Discard the herbs. Turn up the heat and simmer the remaining liquid until reduced by about half.","STEP 5","Meanwhile, make the croûtes. Heat oven to 220C/200C fan/gas 7. In a small bowl, mix together the parsley leaves, oil and plenty of salt and pepper. Dip one side of each baguette slice into the mixture to coat, then place, herb-side up, on a baking tray and bake until golden, about 15-20 mins.","STEP 6","Add the cream, mustard and tarragon to the sauce and season to taste. Return the chicken to the casserole and warm through. Serve with the croûtes and your favourite seasonal vegetables."]
'Coffee ice cream terrine', ["300g coffee ice cream","300g vanilla ice cream","1 tbsp vegetable oil , for the tin","300g dark chocolate , roughly chopped","50g coconut oil","50g honeycomb or Maltesers, crushed"], ["STEP 1","Leave the ice creams out at room temperature for a few mins to soften slightly. Brush a 1.2-litre loaf tin with the vegetable oil and line with cling film. Put 250g dark chocolate and the coconut oil in a small heatproof bowl over a pan of just simmering water. Stir to melt, then set aside to cool.","STEP 2","Spoon half the coffee ice cream into the base of the tin and level the surface. Working quickly, spread over a quarter of the chocolate sauce, then half the vanilla ice cream and another quarter of chocolate sauce. Repeat with the remaining chocolate sauce and ice creams, finishing with a layer of chocolate sauce. Cover loosely with cling film and freeze for at least 2 hrs, or ideally overnight.","STEP 3","Melt the remaining 50g chocolate in a heatproof bowl over a pan of simmering water. Lift the terrine out of the tin and turn out onto a plate. Drizzle with the melted chocolate and top with the crushed honeycomb or Maltesers. Cut into thick slices to serve."]
'Chocca mocca caramel cake', ["2 tsp instant coffee  granules/powder","2 tbsp cocoa powder","2 tbsp hot water","175g softened butter","175g golden caster sugar","2 eggs","2 tbsp golden syrup","200g self-raising flour","4 tbsp milk","2 x 50g/2 x 2oz chocolate  caramel bars","100g chocolate  caramel bars","50g butter","2 tbsp milk","100g icing sugar , sifted"], ["STEP 1","Preheat the oven to 180C/Gas 4/fan oven 160C. Butter a 20cm/8in round cake tin and line the base with baking parchment.","STEP 2","Measure the coffee and cocoa into a cup, add the hot water and mix to a smooth paste. Put the butter, sugar, eggs, syrup, flour, milk and cocoa paste in a large mixing bowl and beat with a wooden spoon or electric beaters for 2-3 minutes until smooth. Break the caramel bars into sections and stir into the mixture.","STEP 3","Turn the mixture into the prepared tin and smooth the top. Bake for 35-40 minutes, until the top springs back when you press it lightly. Cool in the tin for 5 minutes, then turn out, peel off the lining paper and leave to cool.","STEP 4","To make the icing, break up the caramel bars and put in a small pan with the butter and milk. Gently heat until smooth, stirring all the time, then remove from the heat and stir in the icing sugar (don’t worry if it doesn’t dissolve immediately, just keep stirring). Leave to cool until it thickens enough to leave a trail when you lift the spoon. Put the cake on a serving plate, spread the icing over the top, letting it fall softly down the sides, then leave to set."]
'Affogato', ["12 scoops good-quality vanilla ice cream","6 shots hot espresso coffee"], ["STEP 1","Several hours in advance, lay ice cream on a freezer-proof tray and put the tray back in the freezer.","STEP 2","To serve, put balls of ice cream into 6 small glasses or bowls, and pour a shot of hot espresso coffee over each. Serve straight away, stirring the vanilla ice cream into the hot coffee so that it melts a little."]
'Chunky fudge & coffee ripple ice cream', ["3 tbsp instant coffee granules","210g pot coffee sauce","8pieces of dairy fudge , squashed into smaller chunks","1 plump vanilla pod","300ml full-fat milk","300ml double cream","4 egg yolks","100g golden caster sugar"], ["STEP 1","Place a container in the freezer. Split the vanilla pod lengthways, scrape the seeds out with the point of the knife and tip into a pan with the milk, cream and pod. Bring to the boil, then remove from the heat and leave to infuse for at least 20 mins. For the best flavour, this can be done a few hours beforehand and left to go cold (see tip, below).","STEP 2","In a large bowl, whisk the sugar and egg yolks together for a few minutes until they turn pale and fluffy. Put the vanilla cream back on the heat until it’s just about to boil. Stir through the coffee granules then carefully sieve the liquid onto the yolks, beating with the whisk until completely mixed.","STEP 3","At this point, get a large bowl of iced water and sit a smaller bowl in it. Pour the custard back into the pan and cook on the lowest heat, stirring slowly and continuously, making sure the spoon touches the bottom of the pan, for about 10 mins until thickened (see rules, below). Strain the custard into the bowl sitting in the iced water and leave to cool, then churn until scoopable (see methods, below).","STEP 4","Layer the cold container with ice cream and spoonfuls of coffee sauce and fudge pieces. Freeze overnight and serve."]
'Chocolate & coffee truffle pots', ["200g dark chocolate","100ml strong  coffee","4 tbsp favourite spirit, such as rum, brandy , Disaronno","400ml double cream","2 tbsp golden caster sugar","cocoa powder , to serve"], ["STEP 1","Break the chocolate into small chunks and tip into a bowl with the coffee and alcohol. Bring 250ml of the cream to the boil, then pour over the chocolate mixture and stir until the chocolate has melted and the mixture is smooth. Divide the mix between 6 coffee cups and leave to set overnight in the fridge.","STEP 2","To serve, whip the remaining cream with the sugar until just set. Spoon the cream onto the chocolate pots and serve dusted with cocoa powder so each cup looks like a cappuccino."]
'Boozy coffee & walnut cake', ["200g caster sugar","200g softened butter","4 eggs , beaten","200g self-raising flour","1 tsp baking powder","15 walnut  halves","2 heaped tbsp  instant coffee , dissolved in 1 tbsp boiling water","500g pot  mascarpone","85g light muscovado sugar","4 tbsp  Tia Maria","a few toasted  walnut  halves, for decoration"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 190C/fan 170C/gas 5. Butter two 20cm sandwich tins and line with non-stick baking paper. Toast the walnut halves in the oven for 10 mins. Reserve 10 and chop the rest. Dissolve the instant coffee in 1 tbsp of boiling water, cool and add the basic cake mix (see recipe for Classic Victoria sponge, right), instead of the milk.","STEP 2","For the filling, beat the mascarpone with the light muscovado sugar and Tia Maria until smooth. Sandwich the cooled cakes with a third of the filling and the chopped walnuts.","STEP 3","Cover the top and sides of the cake with the rest of the filling and decorate the top with the toasted walnut halves."]
'Spiced fig, coffee & hazelnut cake', ["4 dried figs , chopped into small pieces","75ml hot strong coffee or espresso","100g blanched hazelnuts","200g slightly salted butter , very soft, plus a little for greasing","225g light muscovado sugar","200g plain flour","2 tsp baking powder","2 tsp vanilla extract","2 tsp mixed spice","50g natural yogurt","4 large eggs","250g pack slightly salted butter , very soft","2 tsp vanilla extract or bean paste","400g icing sugar","250g tub full-fat cream cheese","6 tbsp fig jam or conserve","10-12 figs , halved or quartered","200g caramel (Carnation or Bon Maman work well)"], ["STEP 1","First, make the sponge. Put the dried figs in a bowl and pour over the coffee. Leave to soak for 30 mins. Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Tip the hazelnuts onto a baking tray and toast in the oven for 5-8 mins until golden brown and aromatic. Tip 75g of the nuts into a food processor (set aside the rest for later) and leave to cool for 10 mins. Meanwhile grease the base and sides of a 20 x 30cm rectangular cake tin with butter and line with baking parchment.","STEP 2","Whizz the cooled nuts until finely chopped. Add the soaked figs and any remaining coffee, and whizz again to a paste. Add the remaining sponge ingredients to the processor with a good pinch of salt. Blend until well combined, scraping down the sides once or twice and blending again. Scrape into your cake tin, level the surface and bake for 25 mins, or until a skewer inserted into the centre of the cake comes out clean. Cool in the tin for 10 mins, then flip onto a wire rack, peel off the parchment and leave to cool.","STEP 3","While the cake cools, make the icing. Put the butter, vanilla and half the sugar in a large bowl. Roughly mash together with a spatula, then blend with an electric hand whisk until smooth. Add the cream cheese and the remaining icing sugar, mash, then blend again until smooth. Split the icing into 2 batches, one for layering and a crumb coat, and one for a final coat. You can chill the icing while the cake cools, but remove it from the fridge 15 mins before using to bring back to room temperature.","STEP 4","Now assemble the cake. Transfer the cooled cake to a chopping board. Score the sponge at 10cm intervals along the length of the cake, marking out 3 sections, 20 x 10cm each. Cut through, then stack the cakes on top of each other to check they are the same size. Trim any uneven edges, then unstack.","STEP 5","Put 1 sponge on a cake board or plate. Spread with a little icing and 3 tbsp fig jam, keeping the jam about 1cm from the edges. Top with another sponge, more icing and jam, then sandwich with the final sponge. Use a palette knife to cover the entire cake with the remaining first batch of icing (the crumb coat) – don’t worry if it’s a little messy. Make sure you fill any gaps between the layers with icing. Once covered, chill for at least 30 mins to firm up the icing. Chill the remaining icing too, but bring it out of the fridge 10-15 mins before the cake so it is ready for spreading.","STEP 6","Decorate the cake. Remove it from the fridge and cover with the remaining icing. Use a palette knife to create smooth edges, or leave it fairly rough, if you like. Top the cake with the figs, pointy ends up. Put the caramel in a small piping bag, snip off the corner and drizzle over the top of the cake, encouraging it down the sides (or just drizzle it over with a spoon). Roughly chop the remaining toasted nuts and scatter over the top. Serve in slices with extra figs on the side, if you like. Keep leftovers in the fridge for 3 days, but bring to room temperature before eating."]
'Flat white', ["18g ground espresso , or 1 espresso pod","100ml milk","the right cup , 150-200ml capacity"], ["STEP 1","Make around 35ml espresso using your coffee machine and pour into the base of your cup.","STEP 2","Steam the milk with the steamer attachment so that it has around 1-2cm of foam on top. Hold the jug so that the spout is about 3-4cm above the cup and pour the milk in steadily. As the volume within the cup increases, bring the jug as close to the surface of the drink as possible whilst aiming to pour into the centre. Once the milk jug is almost touching the surface of the coffee, tilt the jug\xa0to speed up the rate of pour. As you accelerate, the milk will hit the back of the cup and start naturally folding in on itself to create a pattern on the top."]
'Foolproof chocolate & coffee fondants', ["175g butter , plus extra melted butter for greasing","cocoa powder , for dusting","175g good-quality dark chocolate (we used 70%)","200g golden caster sugar","4 eggs","50ml good-quality black coffee (we used espresso coffee)","85g plain flour","vanilla ice cream , to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6. Use a pastry brush to grease 6 dariole moulds or individual pudding basins really well and place in the fridge for the butter to set. Then grease again, dust with cocoa powder and set aside.","STEP 2","Melt the butter and chocolate together over a pan of barely simmering water, then remove. In a separate bowl, beat the sugar and eggs together until light and fluffy. Fold the chocolate and beaten egg together, then add the coffee and finally fold through the flour.","STEP 3","Divide the mixture between the darioles. The puddings can now be frozen or chilled. Place on a baking tray and bake for exactly 12 mins until the mixture has puffed up and formed a crust but still has a slight wobble to it. Turn the puddings out onto serving plates and serve with a big scoop of vanilla ice cream for a great contrast of hot and cold."]
'Christmas spice latte', ["200ml milk","1 tsp festive spice","a pinch of sugar","1 freshly brewed espresso"], ["STEP 1","Pour the milk into a small pan and add your festive spice and the sugar. Bring to a simmer mixing with a balloon whisk.","STEP 2","Pour the coffee into a mug and slowly add the hot spiced milk, holding some of the froth back with a spoon. Float the milk froth on top when the mug is full, then garnish with another pinch of festive spice."]
'Coffee creams with chocolate orange sauce', ["300g cream cheese  or mascarpone","85g caster sugar","5 tbsp  strong coffee , cold (espresso is about the right strength)","284ml  tub double cream","your choice of biscuits , to serve","175g plain chocolate , grated","50g butter","5 tbsp milk","zest 1 orange"], ["STEP 1","Beat the cream cheese or mascarpone together in a large bowl with the sugar, then fold in the cold coffee. In a separate bowl, lightly whip the double cream to soft peak stage, then gently fold it in to the coffee mixture. Spoon into 6 glasses or onto plates, cover and keep in the fridge until ready to serve. You can do this up to 4 hours ahead.","STEP 2","To make the sauce, put the grated chocolate, butter and milk into a heatproof bowl. Bring a pan of water to boiling point, turn off heat and stand the bowl over it to warm and melt the chocolate. Stir in orange zest. Cool in the fridge until needed. Pour sauce into a sauce boat.","STEP 3","To finish, remove the cream from the fridge, then heat through the sauce. Serve with the chocolate sauce drizzled over and your choice of biscuits on the side."]
'Turkish coffee sour', ["2 tbsp coffee grounds","5 cardamom pods , bruised (plus 2 to garnish)","strip of lemon peel","2 cloves","1 cinnamon stick","20g egg whites","75ml spiced rum","25ml lemon juice","Angostura bitters (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Put the coffee grounds in a pan with 250ml water. Add the cardamom pods, lemon peel, cloves and cinnamon stick. Bring to the boil, then strain though a sieve lined with 2 pieces of kitchen paper. Leave to cool.","STEP 2","Pour 50ml of the coffee mixture into a cocktail shaker filled with ice then add the egg white, spiced rum and lemon juice. Shake hard for 1-2 mins then double strain into 2 coupe or martini glasses. Decorate with another cardamom pod and a few drops of Angostura bitters if you like."]
'Upcycled white Russian', ["3 tbsp used ground coffee","250ml dark rum","2 tbsp maple syrup","ice","1 vanilla pod","150ml double cream","150ml milk vodka (we used Black Cow)"], ["STEP 1","Put the coffee grounds in a jar or bowl. Pour over the rum, cover and steep for 24 hrs. Once infused, strain the rum into a jug through a sieve lined with kitchen paper, then stir in the maple syrup.","STEP 2","To make the cocktail, take four tumblers and pour 25ml of the coffee rum into each one, then top up with ice cubes. In a jug, mix together the seeds from the vanilla pod (keep the pods for the garnish), the double cream and the vodka. Put a spoon on top of the ice in the glass, then pour a quarter of the boozy cream very slowly onto the spoon so that it overflows into the glass below. This will slow it down and help the cream layer to float on top of the coffee liqueur below. Repeat with the remaining three glasses, then garnish each one with a piece of vanilla pod and serve with a stirrer."]
'Spiced meringues with coffee-soaked prunes', ["3 egg whites (left over from the fish pies, see \'Goes well with\', below)","175g caster sugar","½ tsp mixed spice","2 tbsp instant coffee","50g caster sugar","250g pack ready-to-eat pitted prune","285ml and 142ml pot double cream"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 150C/fan 130C/gas 2 and line 2 baking sheets with baking parchment. Put the egg whites in a clean bowl and beat with an electric whisk until thickened and frothy. While whisking, add sugar 1 tbsp at a time until the mix is stiff and glossy. Fold in the spice.","STEP 2","Working quickly, pile 8 big spoonfuls of the meringue onto the baking sheets, spacing them evenly apart. Then, with the back of a spoon, lightly flatten them and hollow out the centres to make nest shapes. Bake for 45 mins, then turn off the oven and leave the meringues inside to cool for 4 hrs or overnight. Can be made 2 days ahead and kept in an airtight container.","STEP 3","Put the coffee and sugar in a pan with 200ml water. Add the prunes, bring to a simmer, then stir to dissolve the coffee. Leave to simmer for 10 mins until most of the liquid is absorbed, then take off the heat and cool. Can be made 2 days ahead and chilled.","STEP 4","To serve, whip the cream until it holds its shape. Spoon onto the meringues, then top with the prunes and a little of their juice."]
'Iced coffee', ["200ml strong black coffee","50ml milk","ice","maple syrup, optional"], ["STEP 1","Make a 200ml cup of black coffee following pack instructions, then allow the coffee to go completely cold.\xa0Pour into a blender with\xa0the milk along with 2 or 3 handfuls of ice and maple syrup, if using, then blend until smooth and foamy.","STEP 2","Pour into a chilled tall glass\xa0and serve."]
'Tiramisu ice-cream cake', ["2 x 250g  tubs mascarpone","115g caster sugar","6 tbsp marsala","50g dark chocolate , chopped","142ml  tub  double cream , lightly whipped","5 tbsp fresh ground coffee","85g caster sugar","3 tbsp brandy","200g bag Italian sponge finger , we used Savoiardi Boudoir biscuits","cocoa , for dusting","142ml tub double cream , lightly whipped","chocolate  shavings or curls"], ["STEP 1","Line a 1kg loaf tin with cling film. Beat the mascarpone, sugar and marsala together then fold in the chocolate and cream.","STEP 2","Make up the coffee with 600ml boiling water, leave for 5 mins then strain into a bowl and stir in the sugar and brandy.","STEP 3","Reserve 2 biscuits then quickly dip the remainder as you use them into the coffee mixture and line them along the base and up the long sides of the tin (they will stand above the rim).","STEP 4","Spoon in half the creamy mixture. Dip the last biscuits into the coffee and place on top end to end. Spoon the remaining creamy mixture on top, then fold over the sponge fingers above the rim and press lightly into the filling. Cover and freeze. To serve, turn out onto a plate, strip off the cling film and dust generously with cocoa. Spoon the cream down the centre and decorate with the chocolate."]
'Dalgona coffee', ["3 tbsp instant coffee","2 tbsp sugar","400-500ml milk (we used whole milk)"], ["STEP 1","Whisk the coffee, sugar and 3 tbsp boiling water in a bowl\xa0for approximately 5 mins until the mixture is thick and fluffy with stiff peaks. This is easiest done using an electric whisk but can be done by hand.","STEP 2","For\xa0hot coffee, heat the milk and pour into two heatproof glasses. For cold coffee, pour the cold milk into two glasses.\xa0Divide the coffee mixture in half and spoon evenly on top of the glasses. Serve and stir thoroughly\xa0before drinking."]
'Louise Read’s Coffee crunch cake', ["175g softened butter , plus extra for greasing","175g caster sugar","3 medium eggs","175g self-raising flour","1 tsp baking powder","2 egg whites","100g caster sugar","3 tsp instant coffee granules","25g chopped walnuts","100g softened butter","50g icing sugar , sifted","3 tbsp icing sugar"], ["STEP 1","Make the meringue: whisk the egg whites until stiff, add half the sugar, whisk again until stiff, then repeat with the remaining sugar. Mix the coffee with 3 tbsp boiling water to dissolve the granules. Gently fold the walnuts and 1 tsp of the coffee into the meringue. Set aside while you make the cake mixture.","STEP 2","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Grease 2 x 20cm loose-bottomed sandwich tins and line the bases with baking parchment. Beat together the butter and sugar until light and fluffy, then gradually whisk in the eggs. Fold in the flour and baking powder, then finally fold in 2 tsp of the coffee liquid. Divide the mixture between the 2 tins, putting a little more mixture in one than the other.","STEP 3","Spread the meringue on top of the tin containing less cake mix. Bake the untopped sponge for about 20 mins until an inserted skewer comes out clean. Continue baking the meringue-topped sponge for an additional 20 mins, then carefully remove both cakes from their tins and leave to cool on a wire rack.","STEP 4","To make the filling, beat the butter and icing sugar together, adding 2 tsp more coffee. To make the icing, mix a final tsp of the coffee into the icing sugar. Add a drop more water to make a runny icing. 5 Sandwich the 2 cakes together with the coffee filling, putting the meringuetopped sponge on top. Drizzle all over with the coffee icing to finish."]
'Hazelnut latte cake', ["100g unsalted butter , plus extra for greasing","100g bag chopped toasted hazelnuts","300g light brown soft sugar","6 tbsp semi-skimmed milk","1 tsp fine instant coffee powder (see tip)","6 large eggs , at room temperature","2 tbsp cornflour","175g plain flour","50g light brown soft sugar","1 tsp fine instant coffee powder","1 tbsp Frangelico (hazelnut) liqueur, or use Kahlua or Tia Maria","400g mascarpone","300g hazelnut chocolate spread (Nutella has the best texture for this)","1 tbsp fine instant coffee powder","50g chopped toasted hazelnuts","150ml pot double cream","4 tsp icing sugar","3 tbsp semi-skimmed milk","1 tbsp fine instant coffee powder, dissolved in 1 tsp boiling water"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Generously butter two 20cm sandwich tins (ideally about 4.5cm deep or deeper) and line the bases with baking parchment. Put the hazelnuts into a food processor with 2 tbsp of the sugar, then pulse until finely chopped. Don’t expect them to go as fine as ground almonds and avoid over-processing, as this can make the nuts greasy.","STEP 2","Put the butter, milk and coffee powder into a small pan and heat gently until the butter has melted. Set aside.","STEP 3","Now start the sponge. Crack the eggs into the bowl of a tabletop mixer, add the rest of the sugar and beat for 5-10 mins (or beat with an electric hand mixer in a large deep bowl for 15-20 mins) or until thick and billowy, and the mixture leaves a trail that holds for a couple of seconds. It is really important that the mixture has thickened, almost doubling in size, in order to achieve a light sponge.","STEP 4","Mix the cornflour, plain flour and 1/2 tsp salt, and sift onto the whisked mixture. Using a large metal spoon, fold in very carefully. Sprinkle in the ground nuts, then fold these in too. Pour the warm milk mix around the edge of the bowl, and fold this in. Don’t rush the folding, and continue with a light lifting and cutting motion until ribbons of liquid stop appearing. Divide the batter between the tins, then bake for 25 mins until risen to the middle and a burnished gold.","STEP 5","Loosen the sides of the cakes with a palette knife, then cool in the tins on a rack for 20 mins (the cakes will level off, and possibly go a bit wrinkly, but that’s normal). Carefully remove from the tins and cool, paper-side down.","STEP 6","Make the syrup and the frosting while you wait. Put the sugar and 4 tbsp water into a small pan. Bring to the boil and leave for 1 min then take off the heat. Stir in the coffee and alcohol. Beat the mascarpone, hazelnut chocolate spread and coffee together with a wooden spoon, until silky and even.","STEP 7","To assemble, cut the cold cakes horizontally across the middle, using a long serrated knife. With a pastry brush, dampen the cut surfaces all over with the syrup. Use it all. Put one cake layer onto a plate or stand, cut-side up. Spoon on 3 generous dollops of the frosting, then spread to the edges with a palette knife. The frosting should be about 5mm deep. Repeat with the next two layers. When you come to the final layer, place it cut-side down, so that the top of the cake is smooth. Paddle the rest of the frosting over the top and sides of the cake. The layer on the top can be thin. Clean the knife then use it to press a neat ring of nuts into the frosting on the side of the cake. Brush any excess away.","STEP 8","For the topping, put 3 tbsp of the cream, 1 tsp icing sugar and 1 tbsp milk into a small bowl. Put the rest of the cream, milk and sugar, plus most of the dissolved coffee into a larger bowl. Whip the white cream, then the coffee cream, until they look like soft cappuccino froth, thick but still able to flow from a spoon. Pour most of the coffee cream onto the cake and push it out to cover the top. Whisk a little more coffee into what is left, so that it turns a few shades darker.","STEP 9","To decorate with a characteristic latte ‘tree’ shape, load a pointy teaspoon with a little of the white cream. Start at the base of the tree, just right of the centre of the cake. Push the spoon into the coffee cream and let the white cream flow slowly. As it flows, drag the spoon then pull it gently away, to make a leaf-like shape. Repeat with more white cream on the left to make another leaf, then repeat 3-4 times, working up the cake top graduating from large to small leaves. Use the same technique to sweep a couple of arc shapes around the edge of the pattern.","STEP 10","Use the dark cream to add detail to each leaf – you can paint this on with the tip of a teaspoon or a clean cocktail stick. Use a cocktail stick to drag the points of each leaf up and outwards. Draw a line down from the top of the ‘tree’ to the bottom to finish. The cake will keep for up to 2 days. Loosely cover any cut edges but avoid covering the cake directly as you could damage the decoration. Serve from the fridge or at cool room temperature."]
'Coffee & walnut cake', ["250g pack softened butter, plus extra for the tins","100ml strong black coffee (made with 2 tbsp coffee granules), cooled","280g self-raising flour","250g golden caster sugar","½ tsp baking powder","4 eggs","1 tsp vanilla extract","85g walnut, 2 tbsp roughly chopped, the rest finely chopped","100g icing sugar, sifted, plus a little extra for dusting","150ml double cream","100g mascarpone, at room temperature"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Butter\xa02 x 20cm springform cake tins and line with baking parchment. Set aside 2 tbsp of the coffee for the filling.","STEP 2","Beat the butter, flour, sugar, baking powder, eggs, vanilla and half the remaining coffee in a large bowl with an electric whisk until lump-free. Fold in the finely chopped walnuts, then divide between the tins and roughly spread. Scatter the roughly chopped walnuts over one of the cakes. Bake the cakes for 25-30 mins until golden and risen, and a skewer poked in comes out clean. Drizzle the plain cake with the remaining coffee. Cool the cakes in the tins.","STEP 3","Meanwhile, make the filling: beat together the icing sugar, cream and mascarpone, then fold in the reserved 2 tbsp coffee. Spread over the plain cake, then cover with the walnut-topped cake and dust with a little icing sugar."]
'Iced coffee sundae', ["1 shot of  cold espresso  coffee or 30ml/1fl oz strong black coffee","200ml full-fat milk","3 scoops vanilla ice cream","2 ice cubes","1 small brownie or  chocolate chip  cookie"], ["STEP 1","Pour the espresso or strong coffee and milk into a blender. Add 2 scoops of ice cream and the ice cubes, then blitz until it is the consistency of a smoothie. Pour straight into a tall glass, top with the last scoop of ice cream and crumble over the brownie or cookie to finish."]
'Coffee cupcakes', ["140g golden caster sugar","140g butter , softened","3 large eggs","140g self-raising flour","2 tbsp instant  espresso mixed with 1 tbsp water","few chocolate-coated coffee beans , to decorate (optional)","200g butter , softened","200g icing sugar","2 tsp instant  espresso mixed with 1 tbsp water","50g plain chocolate , melted"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 170C/150C fan/gas 3. Line 18 holes in 2 bun tins with fairy cake cases. Beat the sugar with the butter until light and creamy. Beat in the eggs, one by one, adding 1 tbsp flour at the same time. Beat in the rest of the flour along with the espresso. Spoon into the cake cases and bake for 17 mins, swapping the trays after 12 mins. Cool on a wire rack.","STEP 2","To make the icing, beat the butter until pale, then gradually beat in the icing sugar, followed by the espresso and the melted chocolate. When the cakes are completely cool, swirl the icing generously on top and decorate with coffee beans, if you like."]
'Cappuccino tiramisu', ["8 sponge fingers , halved","cold coffee","Baileys ice cream","142ml carton double cream","1 tbsp icing sugar","3 tbsp Baileys","chocolate  flakes"], ["STEP 1","Press the sponge fingers into four glasses. Pour on enough cold coffee to soak the sponge.","STEP 2","Add Baileys ice cream, double cream whipped with icing sugar and Baileys. Scatter with chocolate flakes."]
'Coffee cocktails', ["142ml  carton double cream","5 tbsp Baileys","125ml  strong coffee , cooled","4 tbsp vodka","4 tbsp Kahlúa","coffee beans , to decorate, optional","biscuits  of your choice, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Lightly whip the cream until slightly thickened, then stir in the Baileys and whip a little more, or thin if necessary with a little water, to get a thick, creamy pouring consistency.","STEP 2","Divide the coffee, vodka and Kahlúa between 4 glasses. Carefully spoon over the cream and sprinkle with a few coffee beans to decorate if you like. Serve with biscuits of your choice – Italian amaretti or biscotti would be perfect."]
'Chococcino cake', ["200g soft, butter , plus extra for greasing","1 tsp baking powder","85g good-quality cocoa powder , such as Cafédirect or Green & Black\'s","140g self-raising flour","200g golden caster sugar","4 eggs","2 tbsp milk","2 x 250g tubs  mascarpone","85g golden caster sugar","4 tbsp very strong coffee  (see tip below)","50g dark chocolate , for grating"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven, line the tins and make the sponge as described in the \'goes well with\' recipe, sifting the cocoa powder with the flour and baking powder.","STEP 2","For the filling, beat the mascarpone and sugar together, then beat in the coffee. Use half the mix to sandwich the cakes and spread the other half over the top, swirling with the back of a spoon to make pointy curls. Finely grate the chocolate over the top, then serve."]
'The ultimate makeover: Coffee walnut cake', ["1 tbsp coffee granules, plus 1 tsp","225g self-raising flour","1 tsp baking powder","50g ground almonds","85g light muscovado sugar","50g golden caster sugar","25g chopped walnuts","2 eggs , beaten","250g natural yogurt","75ml walnut oil","2 tbsp golden caster sugar","2 tsp coffee granules","140g light mascarpone","100g quark","1 tbsp icing sugar","¼ tsp vanilla extract","140g fondant icing sugar","1 tsp coffee granules","1 tbsp finely chopped walnuts"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Oil and bottom-line a 20cm round (6cm deep) loose-bottom tin. For the cake, mix the coffee with 2 tsp warm water and set aside. Tip the flour into a large mixing bowl. Stir in the baking powder, ground almonds, both sugars (use fingers to rub out any lumps from the muscovado) and walnuts, then make a dip in the centre. Put the eggs, yogurt, oil and coffee mix into the dip and stir the mixture with a wooden spoon so everything is evenly mixed. Spoon the mixture into the tin, smooth the top to level it, then bake for 40-45 mins, or until a skewer inserted into the centre of the cake comes out clean. Let the cake cool in the tin briefly, then turn it out and peel off the lining paper. Leave to cool completely while you make the filling and icing.","STEP 2","Make the syrup for the filling: put the caster sugar and coffee into a small, heavy-based saucepan, then pour in 3 tbsp water. Heat gently, stirring to help the sugar dissolve. Once dissolved, raise the heat, then boil at a fast rolling boil for about 2½-3 mins until thickened and syrupy. Pour into a small heatproof bowl and set aside to cool. When cold it should be the consistency of treacle.","STEP 3","Meanwhile, finish off the filling and make the icing. Beat the mascarpone, quark, icing sugar and vanilla together until smooth, then stir in the cold coffee syrup. Set aside. For the icing, sift the fondant icing sugar into a bowl. Mix the coffee with 1 tbsp warm water, stir this into the fondant icing sugar with about 1 more tsp water to give a smooth, thick but spreadable icing. Split the cake into 3, then sandwich back together with the filling. Spread the icing over the top, scatter over the chopped walnuts and leave to set. Store in the fridge."]
'Iced latte', ["2 espresso shots (60ml)","2 tsp sugar, honey or maple syrup (to taste)","ice","100ml whole milk"], ["STEP 1","Mix the hot espresso with the sugar until it dissolves.","STEP 2","Fill a glass with ice and stir in the sweetened coffee.","STEP 3","Pour over the milk and stir until combined."]
'Coffee cocktails & star biscuits', ["200g soft butter","140g caster sugar","1 egg yolk","1 tsp vanilla extract","280g plain flour , plus a little extra for rolling","50ml strong coffee , cooled","1 tbsp Kahlúa","2 tbsp double cream","cocoa powder , for dusting"], ["STEP 1","Stir together the butter, sugar, egg yolk and vanilla using a wooden spoon. Stir in the flour – you might need to get your hands in at the end. Tip onto a floured surface and bring together into a smooth dough.","STEP 2","Roll out the dough – half at a time if you like – and stamp out 5-6cm stars. Keep re-rolling trimmings, and you should get about 40 biscuits. Cut out a thin triangle about 2cm long and ½cm wide at one of the indents of each star. Arrange on trays lined with baking parchment, cover with cling film and chill for 30 mins.","STEP 3","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/ gas 6. Remove cling film and bake the biscuits for 8-12 mins until golden. Cool, then dust with icing sugar. The cooked biscuits can be frozen for up to 3 months.","STEP 4","Mix the coffee and Kahlúa in a Martini glass. Slowly pour in the double cream over the back of a teaspoon so that it gently settles on the top of the coffee. Dust with a little cocoa and serve with a star biscuit slotted onto the glass and a plateful of Mint chocolate truffles, if you like (see \'Goes well with\')."]
'Mocha', ["18g ground espresso, or 1 espresso pod","250ml milk","1 tsp drinking chocolate","large cup, 300-350ml capacity"], ["STEP 1","Make around 35ml espresso using a coffee machine\xa0and pour\xa0into the base of your cup. Add the drinking chocolate\xa0and mix well until smooth.","STEP 2","Steam the milk with the steamer attachment so that it has around 4-6cm of foam on top. Hold the jug so that the spout is about 3-4cm above the cup and pour the milk in steadily. As the volume within the cup increases, bring the jug as close to the surface of the drink as possible whilst aiming\xa0into the centre. Once the milk jug is almost touching the surface of the coffee, tilt to speed up the rate of pour. As you accelerate, the milk will hit the back of the cup and start naturally folding in on itself to create a pattern on the top."]
'The ultimate makeover: Tiramisu', ["250ml strong hot coffee , preferably using freshly ground","1 tbsp golden caster sugar","4 tbsp marsala","18 sponge fingers (boudoir biscuits) , preferably Savoiardi","1 tbsp golden caster sugar","1 tbsp cornflour","150ml semi-skimmed milk","1 medium egg","½ vanilla pod , split lengthways","85g half-fat crème fraîche","1 tbsp marsala","140g light mascarpone","100g light soft cheese","½ tsp cocoa powder , to finish","raspberry , to finish (optional)"], ["STEP 1","First make the coffee soaking liquid for the sponge fingers. Stir the coffee and sugar together, then pour into a shallow heatproof dish. Stir in the Marsala and leave to cool.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, prepare the filling. Put the sugar and cornflour into a medium saucepan, preferably non-stick. Stir in 1 tbsp of the measured milk to make a thin, smooth paste. Separate the egg, putting the white into a medium bowl and setting it aside, and dropping the yolk into the saucepan. Beat the yolk into the cornflour paste, then stir in the rest of the milk. Scrape the seeds from the vanilla pod into the pan, then drop in the pod. Cook over a medium-low heat for about 8-10 mins without letting the mixture boil, stirring all the time, until the mixture thickly coats the back of a wooden spoon. Remove from the heat, then stir in the crème fraîche and the 1 tbsp of Marsala. Transfer the mixture to a bowl, cover the surface with cling film and leave until cold.","STEP 3","To assemble, line a 23 x 13 x 6cm deep loaf tin with cling film (see step 1), leaving an overlap at the top. Beat together the mascarpone and soft cheese, then stir into the rest of the cold filling. Whisk the egg white to stiff peaks and gently fold into the filling using a large metal spoon.","STEP 4","Dip one of the sponge fingers in the coffee mixture, rolling it around briefly, for a few secs only, to coat and soak in, then lift it out before it has a chance to get too soggy (see step 2). If left in the coffee, it will disintegrate. Lay it lengthways in the bottom of the tin. Do the same with 5 more of the sponge fingers, trimming to fit if necessary, so that they cover the bottom of the tin. Spoon over half of the filling, spreading it to cover the biscuits (see step 3), then repeat the biscuit dipping with 6 more of them. Spoon and spread over the rest of the filling, then dip and lay the rest of the sponge fingers over the top (see step 4). Bring the cling film overhang over to cover. Chill overnight.","STEP 5","To serve, turn out onto a serving plate and carefully peel off the cling film. Dust the top with cocoa and scatter with raspberries, if using. Slice and serve the same day."]
'Coffee semifreddo', ["1 tbsp instant coffee","1 tbsp Tia Maria or brandy","4 large eggs , separated","100g golden caster sugar","300ml pot double cream","100g/4oz pack honeycomb Toblerone , finely chopped","dark chocolate curls, to decorate"], ["STEP 1","Oil and line a 1-litre loaf tin with cling film. Put the coffee, Tia Maria or brandy, egg yolks and sugar in a bowl and stir to dissolve the coffee. Put the egg whites in a large bowl and pour the cream in another.","STEP 2","Beat the egg whites until stiff with an electric whisk, then quickly beat the egg yolk mixture until thick and leaving a trail. Now beat the cream until it holds its shape. If you beat everything in this order, you don’t need to wash the whisks in between.","STEP 3","Fold the cream into the coffee mixture, then carefully fold in the whites. Fold through the Toblerone and tip into the loaf tin. Lightly cover the surface with cling film. When frozen, overwrap in foil and freeze. Will keep for up to 6 weeks. You can make the chocolate curls (see video link, above, for instructions) and keep them in a airtight container or freeze.","STEP 4","To serve, unwrap and turn onto a platter. Strip off the cling film and serve topped with the chocolate curls."]
'Microwave coffee & walnut cake', ["85g very soft butter","85g golden caster sugar","2 eggs , beaten","85g self-raising flour","2 tsp instant coffee powder","small handful of walnut pieces (optional)","1 tsp instant coffee powder","1 tsp milk","25g very soft butter","100g icing sugar"], ["STEP 1","In a medium bowl, beat the butter and sugar together until light and fluffy. Gradually add the eggs followed by the flour and instant coffee. Stir most of the walnuts (if using) into the batter, reserving a few for decoration. Transfer to a microwave-proof dish and cook in the microwave on full power for 2 mins. Reduce the power to medium and cook for 2 mins.","STEP 2","After 4 mins, check to see if the cake is cooked – it should be risen and spring back when touched. If it needs a bit longer, cook on medium for 1 min more at a time, checking after each minute until the cake is cooked. Remove and allow to cool.","STEP 3","Meanwhile, make the coffee butter cream. Dissolve the coffee in the milk, then add the butter and icing sugar. Beat until smooth, spread over the cake and top with the reserved walnuts."]
'Espresso, chocolate & chilli cake with coffee cream', ["3 tbsp plain flour , plus extra for the tin","250g dark chocolate , broken into pieces","250g salted butter , softened and chopped, plus extra for greasing","1 tbsp instant espresso powder","2 red bird\'s-eye chillies , deseeded and finely chopped","¼ tsp chilli powder (optional)","6 medium eggs , separated","4 tbsp brown sugar","175g caster sugar","½ tsp cream of tartar","4 tbsp ground almonds","cocoa powder , to serve","300ml double cream","1 tbsp instant espresso powder"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Grease a 22cm springform cake tin with soft butter and line the bottom with baking parchment. Shake a little flour around the buttered edges.","STEP 2","Melt the chocolate and butter together over a pan of simmering water, or in a microwave. Once melted, whisk together until smooth and add the espresso powder and chillies and chilli powder, if using. Whisk the egg yolks with the brown sugar and caster sugar, either in an electric mixer or with an electric hand whisk, for 5-10 mins until thick and pale. In a separate bowl, using a clean whisk, beat the egg whites and cream of tartar until soft rounded peaks form.","STEP 3","Pour the chocolate mixture onto the beaten yolks and sugar, and gently mix until smooth. Add the almonds and flour and mix again. Spoon the egg whites into the chocolate mixture and gently fold together. Pour the batter into the prepared tin and bake for 40-45 mins until the cake is set but with a slight jiggle in the centre. (If the cake is starting to brown too quickly, cover with a piece of baking parchment.)","STEP 4","Leave to cool in the tin – it will sink a little as it cools. Run a knife around the inside of the cake tin to loosen. Remove the baking parchment and place on a cake stand. Whisk the cream and espresso powder until soft peaks form. Serve on the side or spoon on top of the cake dusted with a little cocoa powder."]
'Chocolate tiramisu cake', ["50g butter , plus extra for the tins","4 large eggs","140g caster sugar","1 tsp vanilla extract","100g plain flour","25g cocoa","½ tsp baking powder","1 tbsp demerara sugar","75ml hot espresso or strong rich coffee","4 large egg yolks","75g caster sugar","125ml marsala","200g white chocolate , half chopped, half grated","500g tub mascarpone","200g dark chocolate , grated","1 tbsp cocoa"], ["STEP 1","For the cakes, heat oven to 180C/ 160C fan/gas 4. Butter and line 2 x 20cm sandwich tins. Melt the butter and allow to cool slightly. Put the eggs, sugar and vanilla into a bowl and whisk for about 8 mins or until the mixture is pale, thick and has trebled in volume.","STEP 2","Sift the flour, cocoa, baking powder and a pinch of salt over the egg mixture, then gently fold together. Pour the cooled butter around the edge of the bowl and fold in until fully incorporated. Divide the batter between the prepared tins and bake for 10-12 mins or until a skewer inserted into the middle of the cakes comes out clean. Allow to cool in the tins for a few mins, then transfer to a wire rack to cool completely.","STEP 3","Meanwhile, make the filling. Dissolve the sugar in the coffee and set aside. Put the egg yolks, sugar and Marsala into a heatproof bowl, then set over a large pan of simmering water. Whisk for 5 mins until the mixture is thick and has trebled in volume – make sure the mixture is really thick. Remove from the heat and take the bowl off the pan. Keep whisking until the mixture is cool.","STEP 4","Melt the chopped white chocolate in the microwave on Low and allow to cool slightly. Meanwhile, beat the mascarpone until smooth, then fold into the egg mixture with the cooled white chocolate.","STEP 5","Slice the cakes in half horizontally. Place one layer in the bottom of a 20cm springform tin. Brush with the coffee syrup and spread with 3 tbsp of the mascarpone mixture. Scatter with 1 tbsp grated dark chocolate, then repeat until you end with the fourth layer of cake. Cover with cling film and chill for at least 2 hrs along with the remaining mascarpone mixture.","STEP 6","Remove the tin and put the cake on a serving plate, then cover with the remaining mascarpone mixture. Mix the remaining dark chocolate with the grated white chocolate and press carefully onto the sides of the cake. Dust the top with cocoa."]
'Coffee & walnut flapjacks', ["280g butter","85g dark brown soft sugar","100g golden syrup","100ml espresso or strong coffee","100g bag walnut pieces","175g whole porridge oats","175g rolled porridge oats","100g plain flour","75g butter","3 tbsp hot strong coffee or espresso","350g golden icing sugar","20 walnut halves , plus 2 tbsp finely chopped walnuts",""], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 190C/170C fan/gas 5 and line a 20 x 30cm cake tin with baking parchment. Melt the butter in a pan with the sugar, syrup and coffee. Stir in the walnuts, porridge oats and flour with a pinch of salt. Press evenly into the tin and bake for 25 mins, then leave to cool.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, make the icing. Melt the butter into the coffee, then stir into the icing sugar to make a smooth icing. Once the flapjacks have cooled to room temperature, spread over the icing. Carefully space out your walnut halves, then scatter over the finely chopped walnuts to finish. Leave until the icing is set and firm – you can pop in the fridge to speed up this bit if you like. Will keep in an airtight container for a week."]
'Best ever tiramisu', ["568ml pot  double cream","250g tub  mascarpone","75ml marsala","5 tbsp golden caster sugar","300ml strong coffee, made with 2 tbsp coffee granules and 300ml boiling water","175g pack  sponge fingers","25g dark chocolate","2 tsp  cocoa powder"], ["STEP 1","Put the double cream, mascarpone, marsala and golden caster sugar in a large bowl.","STEP 2","Whisk\xa0until the cream and mascarpone have completely combined and have the consistency of thickly whipped cream.","STEP 3","Pour the coffee into a shallow dish. Dip in a few of the sponge fingers at a time, turning for a few seconds until they are nicely soaked, but not soggy. Layer these in a dish until you’ve used half the sponge fingers, then spread over half of the creamy mixture.","STEP 4","Using the coarse side of the grater, grate over most of the dark chocolate. Then repeat the layers (you should use up all the coffee), finishing with the creamy layer.","STEP 5","Cover and chill for a few hours or overnight. Will keep in the fridge for up to two days.","STEP 6","To serve, dust with the cocoa powder and grate over the remainder of the chocolate."]
'Moreish mocha profiteroles', ["100g plain flour","85g unsalted butter","3 eggs , beaten","4 tbsp Bird\'s custard  powder","6 tbsp golden caster sugar","600ml milk","2 tbsp coffee  essence (dissolve 2 tbsp instant coffee granules in 2 tbsp hot water - we used Nescafé Partners’ Blend)","284ml double cream","100g icing sugar","100g dark chocolate , in pieces","50g butter","50ml coffee","1-2 tbsp coffee liqueur such as Kahlúa"], ["STEP 1","Sift the flour into a bowl and stir in a pinch of salt. Put butter and 200ml cold water into a pan, bring to a rolling boil, then take off the heat. Tip in the flour and salt and stir to form a smooth paste. Now beat the mixture until it starts to come away from the sides of the pan, then tip onto a plate and leave to cool.","STEP 2","Heat oven to 200C/fan 180C/gas 6. Return paste to the pan, then gradually beat in the eggs, mixing well. Spoon walnut-sized balls onto a baking sheet, then bake for 20-25 mins until golden. Remove from oven, poke the underneath with a teaspoon, turn upside-down, then bake for 5 mins to dry out. Cool on a wire rack before filling.","STEP 3","For the filling, mix the custard powder and sugar with a splash of milk until you have a smooth paste. Heat the remaining milk, then stir into the paste. Pour the mixture into a pan and bring to the boil, stirring. Cook for 5 mins until you have a thick custard. Stir in coffee, then leave to cool. Softly whip the cream, sift in the icing sugar and mix, then fold into the custard. Pipe the cream into each choux bun.","STEP 4","For the sauce, melt chocolate and butter with the coffee in a bowl in the microwave on Medium for 1-2 mins. Pour in the liqueur, mix well, then pour over the filled buns."]
'Cold brew coffee', ["50g ground coffee (use coarsely ground for cafetières)","ice","sparkling water or still water to dilute"], ["STEP 1","Put 400ml cold water into a large jug or jar and add the coffee grounds, but do not stir the mixture. Cover and leave to steep for 24hrs.","STEP 2","Gently stir the mixture then pour it through a funnel or sieve lined with coffee filter paper (or a sheet of kitchen paper) into another large jug. This concentrate will keep in the fridge for 2-3 days.","STEP 3","To serve dilute 1 part cold brew with 2 parts still or sparkling water (or to your taste) and serve with lots of ice."]
'Eggnog latte', ["35ml espresso","100ml  milk, steamed and whisked until frothy","150ml eggnog or advocaat","pinch each of nutmeg and ground cinnamon, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Pour the espresso into a large mug. Top with most of the frothy milk, then the eggnog or advocaat.","STEP 2","Stir, add the rest of the milk and sprinkle with the nutmeg and cinnamon to serve."]
'Nutmeg & orange Christmas coffee', ["4 tbsp ground coffee","1 small cinnamon stick","2 pitted dates","pinch of  ground nutmeg","2 cloves","strip of pared orange zest"], ["STEP 1","Put the ground coffee, cinnamon stick and dates in a large cafetiere. Add the ground nutmeg, cloves and orange zest, then pour over 400ml freshly boiled water.","STEP 2","Stir gently with a wooden spoon to combine, then leave to steep for 4 mins. Slowly push down the plunger and serve in espresso cups."]
'Coffee granita', ["500ml freshly brewed, strong black coffee (we used 30g ground coffee in a cafetière and brewed for 7 mins)","80g golden caster sugar","100ml coffee liqueur (we used Kahlúa)","1 tub mascarpone","50g dark chocolate , grated"], ["STEP 1","Pour the coffee into a jug and stir in the sugar until it has dissolved. Add the coffee liqueur and leave to cool completely.","STEP 2","Once cold, pour the mixture into a freezable container and put\xa0in the freezer for 1 hr. Mix it with a fork –\xa0you should start to see ice crystals forming at the edges. Return to the freezer for 20 mins then stir again. Repeat once or twice more until the granita is all clumps of ice.","STEP 3","Serve in glasses or bowls as an elegant dessert. For a more indulgent version, add a dollop of mascarpone and a grating of dark chocolate."]
'Coffee cake', ["170g butter or margarine, plus extra for the tins","170g caster sugar","3 large eggs","170g self-raising flour","1 ½ tsp baking powder","1 tbsp instant coffee, dissolved in 1 tbsp hot water (add more if you like it stronger)","225g icing sugar","100g butter or margarine","1½ tbsp instant coffee, dissolved in 1 tbsp hot water","strawberry jam (optional)","walnuts or cherries, to decorate (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 160C/140C fan/gas 3. Line and butter two 18cm sandwich tins. Add the sugar and butter to a bowl and whisk until very fluffy and pale.","STEP 2","Whisk the eggs in a mug with a fork,\xa0then add them gradually to the mixture with 1 tbsp of flour each time. (Make sure you don\'t use all the flour.) When the eggs have been fully combined into the mix,\xa0add the rest of the flour and the baking powder\xa0and fold it in gently.","STEP 3","Add the\xa0dissolved coffee to the mixture, still folding. Divide into the sandwich tins and cook for 25-30 min until risen and firm and a skewer inserted into the middle comes out clean. Leave to cool in the tin for 5 mins then turn out onto a wire rack to cool completely. Can be frozen at this stage.","STEP 4","Meanwhile, make the icing by beating the icing sugar with the butter until light and fluffy, then add the dissolved coffee. Whisk, then cover and set aside until ready to ice the cake.","STEP 5","Spread half the icing on the bottom of one sponge and spread the strawberry jam on the bottom of the other, if using. Sandwich together, then spread the remaining icing on top. Decorate with walnuts or cherries, if you like."]
'Mocha milkshake', ["85g plain chocolate , 70% or 80%","1 tbsp coffee granules","700ml milk","4 scoops vanilla ice cream , plus extra to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Roughly chop 75g of the chocolate and put into a large jug with the coffee. Bring 300ml of the milk just to the boil, then pour over the chocolate and coffee mix, stirring to melt. Once melted, cool.","STEP 2","Tip the cooled mocha milk into the blender with the ice cream and remaining milk. Blitz until blended, then pour into 4 tall glasses. Add an extra scoop of ice cream to each, if you like, then grate a little of the remaining chocolate on top."]
'Espresso, hazelnut & chocolate shortbread', ["2 tbsp instant espresso powder","250g butter , softened at room temperature","85g caster sugar","225g plain flour , plus extra for dusting","75g rice flour","75g unblanched hazelnuts , halved","150g 70% dark chocolate , broken into chunks","75g blanched hazelnuts , toasted and very roughly chopped (leave some pieces quite large)"], ["STEP 1","Mix the espresso powder with 1 tsp hot water to form a paste (you’ll think it isn’t enough water but it is – don’t add more otherwise it’ll be too watery). Set aside.","STEP 2","Beat the butter and sugar until soft and blended, then beat in the coffee mixture. Don’t overbeat the mixture as you don’t want to incorporate too much air. (If the coffee isn’t completely incorporated, don’t worry – it will be once you add the flours).","STEP 3","Sift together the flours and add them to the butter in three lots, mixing in with a wooden spoon and, eventually, your hands. Bring together into a ball, then transfer to a lightly floured surface and quickly knead in the hazelnuts. Don’t overdo this – you don’t want the butter to get too warm. Press the dough into a circle, wrap it in cling film and put in the fridge for about 40 mins.","STEP 4","Roll out the dough on a lightly floured surface to 0.75cm thick. Cut out circles about 6cm across with a biscuit cutter and put the circles on a non-stick baking sheet (or two baking sheets, depending on their size). Re-roll the dough as you need to, but try not to do this too often. Put the baking sheets in the coldest part of the fridge and leave them for about 45 mins. Heat oven to 160C/140C fan/gas 3.","STEP 5","Bake the shortbread for 20 mins, or until the top is just firm when you press it with your index finger. Take out of the oven and leave on the baking sheets to cool for a while (it is very fragile when hot), then transfer to a wire rack to cool completely.","STEP 6","Melt the chocolate in a bowl set over a pan of simmering water, then remove the bowl and leave to cool a little and rm up somewhat. Dip each piece of shortbread halfway in the melted chocolate, then put on a sheet of baking parchment. Sprinkle the toasted hazelnuts on the chocolate half and leave to set completely. Will keep for 4 days in an airtight tin."]
'Frappé', ["200ml strong coffee , chilled","50ml whole milk","1-3 tbsp sugar syrup (see goes well with)","ice cubes","whipped cream or ice cream to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Pour the coffee into a blender with the milk and two or three\xa0handfuls of ice. Add as much\xa0sugar syrup as you like, starting with a small amount – you can always stir more in at the end if you’d like it sweeter.","STEP 2","Blend until foamy and the ice is broken into\xa0slush. Pour into a glass and add a scoop of ice cream or some whipped cream, if you like."]
'Dark & stormy coffee cocktail', ["25ml dark rum","25ml tequila","ice","ginger beer","2 tbsp freshly brewed espresso"], ["STEP 1","Fill a highball glass with ice and pour in the rum and tequila. Stir then top with ginger beer. Slowly pour in the espresso."]
'Macchiato', ["18g ground espresso , or 1 espresso pod","50-100ml  milk (or the minimum amount your machine will work with)","small cup , 50-80ml capacity"], ["STEP 1","Make around 35ml espresso using your coffee machine and pour\xa0into the base of your cup.","STEP 2","Steam the milk with the steamer attachment so that it has around 1-2cm of foam on top, then spoon 2-3 teaspoons of the foam on top of the espresso (discard the rest of the milk)."]
'Dark mocha torte', ["175g dark chocolate , broken into pieces","100g unsalted butter , room temperature","100g golden caster sugar","2 eggs  plus 1 yolk, lightly beaten","85g ground toasted hazelnut","25g plain flour","2 tbsp strong espresso coffee","175g plain flour","½ tsp baking powder","50g cocoa powder","50g icing sugar","140g unsalted butter , diced","3 egg  yolks","crème fraîche  or whipping cream, to serve"], ["STEP 1","first make the pastry. sift the flour, baking powder, cocoa powder and icing sugar into a bowl. Rub in butter until crumbly. Quickly mix in the eggs until everything comes together with the blade of a knife. Wrap in cling film. Chill for 30 mins. Roll out pastry and line a 21cm fluted loose-bottom tart tin. Chill for 20 mins. Heat oven to 200C/fan 180C/gas 6.","STEP 2","line the pastry case with parchment paper, fill with baking beans and bake blind for 15 mins. Remove beans and cook for a further 5 mins. Remove from oven and reduce temperature to 150C/fan 130C/gas 2.","STEP 3","To make the filling, melt the chocolate in a heatproof bowl over a pan of simmering water or in the microwave on High for 1-2 mins, then cool. Beat the butter and sugar together until pale and fluffy, then gradually beat in the eggs, yolk, nuts and flour. Fold in the chocolate and coffee, pour into the case and bake for 25-30 mins, until crumbs cling to an inserted skewer (the middle of the torte won\'t have set completely; it will continue to firm up out of the oven). Serve cut into thin slices, topped with crème fraîche or cream."]
'Espresso mud cakes, chocolate syrup & ice cream', ["50g unsalted butter , softened, plus extra for the tin","2 tsp espresso powder , dissolved in 2 tsp hot water, plus extra for the tin","100g chocolate (70% cocoa solids), broken into squares","45g Bournville bar , broken into squares","50g golden caster sugar , plus 1 tbsp","1 large egg , separated","seeds from ½ a vanilla pod , or 1/2 tsp vanilla extract","4 tbsp plain flour , sifted","4 tbsp golden syrup","coffee or vanilla ice cream, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Butter four wells of a muffin tin, and sprinkle some espresso powder into each.","STEP 2","In a pan, gently melt half of each of the chocolates with the butter until smooth. Stir in 50g sugar, then take off the heat and cool for a few mins. Stir in the coffee, egg yolk, vanilla and flour until even.","STEP 3","Beat the egg whites with electric beaters or a balloon whisk until foamy and thickened. Add 1 tbsp sugar and whisk until it forms shiny soft peaks. Take care not to overwhisk – softer is better if you’re not sure.","STEP 4","Stir about 1/3 of the egg whites into the chocolate batter to loosen, then carefully fold in the rest of the whites using a large metal spoon or a spatula.","STEP 5","Spoon into the prepared tin, then bake for 10-12 mins or until the cakes are just starting to dome in the middle. Cool the cakes in the tin for 15 mins. In a small pan, melt the remaining chocolates and golden syrup together with 3 tbsp hot water, and whisk until silky smooth. Turn out the cakes and serve warm in a puddle of the syrup and topped with ice cream."]
'Espresso martini', ["100g golden caster sugar","ice","100ml vodka","50ml freshly brewed espresso coffee","50ml coffee liqueur (we used Kahlua)","4 coffee beans (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Start by making the sugar syrup. Put the caster sugar in a small pan over a medium heat and pour in 50ml water. Stir, and bring to the boil.","STEP 2","Turn off the heat and allow the mixture to cool. Put 2 martini glasses in the fridge to chill.","STEP 3","Once the sugar syrup is cold, pour 1 tbsp\xa0into a cocktail shaker along with a handful of ice, the vodka, espresso and coffee liqueur. Shake until the outside of the cocktail shaker feels icy cold.","STEP 4","Strain into the chilled glasses. Garnish each one with coffee beans if you like."]
'Cappuccino traybake', ["250g softened butter , plus extra for greasing","280g self-raising flour","250g golden caster sugar","½ tsp baking powder","4 eggs","150ml pot natural yogurt","1 tsp vanilla paste or extract","1 tbsp cocoa powder , plus extra to dust","100ml strong coffee (we made it with 2 tbsp coffee granules)","140g icing sugar , sifted","350g mascarpone or soft cheese","few chocolate-covered coffee beans"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4. Grease a 20 x 30cm baking or roasting tin and line with baking parchment. To make the sponge batter, beat the butter, flour, sugar, baking powder, eggs, yogurt, vanilla, cocoa and half the coffee in a large bowl with an electric whisk until lump-free. Spoon into the tin, then bake for 25-30 mins until golden and risen and a skewer poked in comes out clean. Drizzle with some of the remaining coffee.","STEP 2","Cool in the tin while you stir the icing sugar into the mascarpone. Spread over the cooled cake, dust with a little cocoa and scatter with the coffee beans."]
'Latte', ["18g ground espresso , or 1 espresso pod","250ml milk","large cup , 300-350ml capacity"], ["STEP 1","Make around 35ml espresso using your coffee machine\xa0and pour it into the base of your cup.","STEP 2","Steam the milk with the steamer attachment so that it has around 2-3cm of foam on top. Hold the jug so that the spout is about 3-4cm above the cup and pour the milk in steadily. As the volume within the cup increases, bring the jug as close to the surface of the drink as possible whilst aiming to pour into the centre. Once the milk jug is almost touching the surface of the coffee, tilt\xa0to speed up the rate of pour. As you accelerate, the milk will hit the back of the cup and start naturally folding in on itself to create a pattern on the top."]
'Pumpkin spice latte', ["2 tsp pumpkin purée","pinch of ground cinnamon, plus extra to serve (or use pumpkin spice)","pinch of ground ginger","pinch of ground nutmeg","30ml  espresso  or strong coffee","250ml  milk (any will work)"], ["STEP 1","Put the pumpkin purée in a large heatproof glass or mug. Stir in the spices and espresso or strong coffee.","STEP 2","Heat the milk in a saucepan over a low heat until steaming and frothy. Pour into the glass or mug, and spoon over any froth. Stir to combine, then dust with more cinnamon or some pumpkin spice before serving."]
'Cappuccino', ["18g ground espresso (or 1 espresso pod)","150ml milk","cocoa powder (optional)","the right cup , 200-250ml capacity"], ["STEP 1","Make around 35ml espresso using a coffee machine\xa0and pour it into the base of your cup.","STEP 2","Steam the milk with the steamer attachment\xa0so that it has around 4-6cm of foam on top. Hold the jug so that the spout is about 3-4cm above the cup and pour the milk in steadily. As the volume within the cup increases, bring the jug as close to the surface of the drink as possible whilst aiming to pour into the centre. Once the milk jug is almost touching the surface of the coffee, tilt the jug\xa0to speed up the rate of pour. As you accelerate, the milk will hit the back of the cup and start naturally folding in on itself to create a pattern on the top. Dust the surface with a little cocoa powder if you like."]
'Tia Maria cheesecake', ["85g hot melted butter , plus extra butter for greasing","14 plain chocolate digestive biscuits , finely crushed","3 x 300g packs full-fat Philadelphia cheese","200g golden caster sugar","4 tbsp plain flour","2 tsp vanilla extract","2 tbsp Tia Maria","3 large eggs","285ml carton  soured cream","142ml carton  soured cream","2 tbsp Tia Maria","cocoa , for dusting","8 Ferrero Rocher  chocolates, unwrapped"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/fan 160C/gas 4. Line the base of a 25cm springform tin with baking parchment. Blend butter and biscuit crumbs. Press onto the base of the tin, bake for 10 mins, then cool.","STEP 2","Increase the oven temperature to 240C/fan 200C/gas 9. Beat the cheese and sugar with an electric whisk until smooth, then whisk in the flour, vanilla, 2 tbsp Tia Maria, eggs and 285ml soured cream.","STEP 3","Grease sides of the cake tin with butter. Pour in the mixture and smooth. Bake for 10 mins, then turn oven down to 110C/fan 90C/ gas ¼ for 25 mins. Turn off the oven, then open the door and leave to cool inside the oven for 2 hrs. Don’t worry if it cracks a little.","STEP 4","Mix 142ml soured cream and Tia Maria, then smooth on top of the cheesecake. Chill."]
'Coffee cream & walnut cupcakes', ["100g butter , well softened","100g light muscovado sugar","100g self-raising flour","2 large eggs","2 tsp instant coffee , mixed with 100ml/3½fl oz boiling water, then cooled","25g walnut half , chopped, plus 12 more for the tops","200ml tub mascarpone (you\'ll find this with the soft cheeses)","2 tbsp light muscovado sugar"], ["STEP 1","Heat oven to 180C/fan 160C/gas 4 and make sure there’s a shelf ready in the middle. Line a 12-hole bun tin with fairy cake cases. Beat the butter, sugar, flour and eggs with 4 tsp of the coffee and a pinch of salt until creamy. Stir in the chopped walnuts.","STEP 2","Spoon the mix into the cases (start by adding 1 heaped tsp to each, then go back and top them up – that way they should all be of equal size), then bake for 18-20 mins until light golden and springy. Cool for a few mins in the tin, then lift the cakes out and cool completely on a rack.","STEP 3","Put the mascarpone, 3 tsp more of the coffee and the sugar into a large bowl, then beat together. Spread a dollop of the coffee cream onto the top of each cake, then finish with a walnut half. The cakes are best if they’re iced fairly near the time of eating, so if you’re making ahead, whip up the mascarpone mix, keep in the fridge, beat it again, then spoon onto the cakes just before serving. Un-iced cakes will keep up to 2 days in an airtight container."]
'Espresso old fashioned', ["double shot (60ml) espresso","50ml bourbon","10ml brown sugar syrup","2 dashes Angostura bitters","ice","orange zest"], ["STEP 1","Mix a double shot (60ml) espresso with 50ml bourbon, 10ml brown sugar syrup and 2 dashes Angostura bitters in a shaker with lots of ice. Shake and strain into a short glass and garnish with a twist of orange zest."]
'Choc-orange hot chocolate', ["150ml milk","50ml double cream","zest of 0.5 orange","50g dark chocolate , chopped","25ml orange liqueur"], ["STEP 1","Heat the milk, cream and orange zest together in a saucepan until simmering then remove from the heat and pour through a sieve into a jug to remove the orange zest. Pour the infused milk mixture back into the pan and add the chocolate, stirring until the chocolate has melted and is really smooth.","STEP 2","Put the pan back on the heat to warm through then add the orange liqueur. Pour into a mug and serve."]
'Deluxe hot chocolate with marshmallows', ["600ml milk","142ml pot double cream","100g chopped chocolate"], ["STEP 1","Pour the milk, double cream and chopped chocolate into a pan. Bring gently to the boil, whisking until smooth. Serve in individual cups or mugs topped with mini marshmallows and a little grated chocolate."]
'Coconut hot chocolate', ["150ml whole milk","25g white chocolate , chopped","25ml coconut-flavoured rum (we used Malibu)","1 tsp finely grated  dark chocolate","1 tsp coconut flakes , toasted (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Pour the milk into a small pan and then place over a medium heat until simmering, stirring so it doesn’t scorch. Remove the pan from the heat then add the white chocolate and stir. Once the chocolate has melted, place the pan back on the heat to warm through. Add the coconut-flavoured rum and pour into a mug.","STEP 2","Garnish with the dark chocolate and a few toasted coconut flakes if you like."]
'White hot chocolate', ["200ml  milk","100g  white chocolate, finely chopped","½ tsp  vanilla extract or bean paste","1 tbsp whipped or  squirty cream","a few mini  marshmallows","1 tsp  caramel sauce","pinch of  sugar sprinkles","pinch of ground cinnamon"], ["STEP 1","Pour boiling water from the kettle into a heatproof mug or glass to warm it up. Heat the milk in a small pan, or in blasts in the microwave, until steaming. Pour the hot water out the mug, and tip in the chocolate and vanilla. Pour over the hot milk and stir for 30 seconds until the chocolate has melted. Top with the cream, marshmallows and drizzle over the sauce with a pinch of sprinkles and cinnamon, if you like."]
'Homemade hot chocolate', ["250ml  milk of your choice","1 tbsp  cocoa","1-2 tbsp  soft light brown sugar","25g dark or plain  chocolate, finely chopped, plus a grating to serve","1 tbsp  whipped cream or squirty cream"], ["STEP 1","Heat the milk, cocoa, sugar and chocolate in a small pan over a medium heat until steaming and the chocolate has melted. Whisk to dissolve the cocoa.","STEP 2","Pour into a mug, then add the cream to float on top. Grate over a little more chocolate to serve."]
'Salted caramel rum hot chocolate', ["25ml dark rum","2 tsp dulce de leche or thick caramel","150ml whole milk","50g milk chocolate , chopped"], ["STEP 1","In a small bowl, mix together the rum and the dulce de leche until smooth then set aside.","STEP 2","Warm the milk in a saucepan over a medium heat until simmering. Remove from the heat and add the chocolate and stir until melted. Pop the pan back on the heat until warm then add the rum mixture and a pinch of flaky sea salt. Pour into a mug and serve."]
'Peppermint hot chocolate', ["200g bar plain chocolate , broken into chunks","600ml milk","150ml pot single or double cream","sugar , to taste","6 peppermint candy canes, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Put the chocolate in a pan with the milk. Gently heat, stirring until all the chocolate has melted. Continue heating until the milk is steaming, then remove from the heat and stir in the cream.","STEP 2","Divide the hot chocolate between 6 mugs, add sugar to taste and hang a candy cane on the edge of each. Pass the mugs round and let everyone stir their hot chocolate with their candy cane – letting as much of the sweet peppermint dissolve as they fancy."]
'Spiced hot choc', ["skimmed milk","1-2 squares of very dark chocolate","a pinch of cinnamon","a dribble of honey","a low-fat oaty biscuit (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Fill a mug with skimmed milk. Add 1-2 squares of very dark chocolate, a pinch of cinnamon, a dribble of honey and heat in the microwave. Add a low-fat oaty biscuit if you like."]
'Midnight mint hot chocolate', ["50ml double cream","1 tsp icing sugar","few drops  peppermint extract","150ml whole milk","50g dark chocolate , chopped","25ml crème de menthe","dark chocolate curls or sprinkles"], ["STEP 1","Whip the cream in a small bowl then stir in the icing sugar and a few drops of peppermint extract. Place in the fridge until needed.","STEP 2","Pour the milk into a saucepan and heat gently until simmering, stirring frequently. Take off the heat then add the chocolate. Stir until the chocolate has completely melted and the mixture is smooth. Return to the heat until warm then add the crème de menthe and pour into a mug.","STEP 3","Top with a dollop of the whipped mint cream and chocolate curls or sprinkles\xa0just before serving."]
'Hazelnut cream hot chocolate', ["50ml double cream","1 tsp chocolate hazelnut spread (we used Nutella)","150ml whole milk","25g milk chocolate , chopped","25ml hazelnut liqueur (we used Frangelico)","1 tsp chopped hazelnuts , toasted"], ["STEP 1","Whip the cream until thick and billowy then fold in the chocolate hazelnut spread. Only stir once or twice, you want a marbled effect.","STEP 2","In a small saucepan over a medium heat warm the milk until simmering. Take off the heat then add the chocolate. Let it melt, stirring frequently until smooth. Return to the heat until warm then add the hazelnut liqueur.","STEP 3","Pour the hot chocolate into a mug and add the whipped cream mixture. Sprinkle the top with the toasted hazelnuts and enjoy."]
'Hot chocolate stirrers', ["sunflower oil, for greasing","300g dark, milk or white chocolate (or a mixture), broken into squares","selection of chocolate buttons, hundreds and thousands, mini fudge pieces or chopped peppermint candy canes"], ["STEP 1","You will need:\\n6 cupcake cases, pencil, pastry brush, 6 empty 47g fromage frais pots (washed and dried), 6 wooden lolly sticks, cellophane and string or ribbon for wrapping, 6 gift tags\\nPush a small hole in the middle of the cupcake cases with a pencil and put aside for later.","STEP 2","Dip the pastry brush in the sunflower oil and paint a very thin layer of oil over the insides of the fromage frais pots.","STEP 3","Put the chocolate in a bowl and heat in the microwave in 30-sec bursts until runny, stirring after each blast. Or melt it in a heatproof bowl set over a pan of simmering water (get an adult to help you). If you’re using different types of chocolate, you should melt them separately.","STEP 4","Carefully pour the melted chocolate into the pots. Put a lolly stick in the middle of each and sprinkle your chosen decorations around it.","STEP 5","Sit a cake case on top of each pot so that it covers the chocolate and the stick pokes through the hole. Put them in the fridge to set overnight.","STEP 6","The next day, carefully pull the chocolates out of the pots and throw away the paper cases. Wrap each in cellophane tied with string and write a tag to read: ‘Simply stir into hot milk.’"]
'Easter hot chocolate', ["200ml  milk","½ tbsp  cocoa powder","100g hollow  chocolate egg  (milk or dark), broken into small pieces","2 tbsp whipped or  squirty cream","25g  mini chocolate eggs, sugar-coated chocolate buttons or beans, or more chocolate egg, broken into small pieces","1 tbsp  mini marshmallows"], ["STEP 1","Pour boiling water from the kettle into a heatproof mug to warm it up. Heat the milk and cocoa in a small pan, or in blasts in the microwave, until steaming. Discard the hot water in the mug, and tip in the chocolate egg pieces. Pour over the hot milk. Stir for 30 seconds or until the chocolate has melted. Top with the cream, sprinkle over the mini eggs or broken egg pieces and marshmallows to serve."]
'Unicorn hot chocolate', ["300ml whole milk","50g white chocolate , chopped","pink food colouring gel","100ml double cream","food colouring gel (optional)","your choice of coloured sweets and/or hundreds and thousands"], ["STEP 1","Whip up the double cream (if using) until it just holds its shape – it should be the consistency of crème fraîche. Then, if you like, stain the inside of a disposable piping bag with different gel food colourings using a skewer to drag a tiny streak of colour from the bottom of the bag to the top.","STEP 2","To make the hot chocolate pour the milk into a small pan and heat until simmering, stirring to stop it scorching. Take the pan off the heat and add the white chocolate then stir until the chocolate has fully melted. Add food colouring to turn the mixture pastel pink then pour into 2 mugs or heatproof glasses.","STEP 3","To decorate fill the prepared piping bag with the whipped cream then snip off the end to create a wide tip. Pipe mounds of the cream on top of the hot chocolate and scatter over sprinkles and coloured sweets\xa0if you like."]
'Snow globe hot chocolate', ["3 large white marshmallows","icing pens, in black and orange","1 giant chocolate button","1 chocolate - a mini Reese\'s peanut butter cup or other domed chocolate is perfect","2 tbsp cocoa powder","2 tbsp Horlicks powder","handful mini white marshmallows","1 cookie (small enough to fit in a jam jar)","3 strawberries laces","1 cocktail stick","1 large jam jar","ribbon and gift tag"], ["STEP 1","First make the marshmallow snowman. Skewer the marshmallows together with a cocktail stick - cut off any of the stick that protrudes from the top. Use a little of the icing pen to stick a chocolate button and peanut butter cup to the top of each marshmallow stack, then draw on a face and 3 dots for buttons. Plait 3 strawberry laces and tie around the neck for a scarf. Stick the snowman to a cookie with a little more icing, then set aside to dry for a few mins.","STEP 2","Mix the cocoa and Horlicks together in the bottom of your jar. Put the snowman on top, then scatter around the mini marshmallows. Screw on the lid, tie with a ribbon and a gift tag with the following instructions: Warm 300ml milk in a pan. Remove the snowman from the jar and add the milk. Stir until smooth and chocolatey, then enjoy, with your marshmallow snowman for dunking."]
'Triple choc hot chocolate', ["50ml double cream","150ml whole milk","50g chopped milk chocolate","25g chopped dark chocolate","few  mini white chocolate buttons"], ["STEP 1","Whip the double cream until it holds its shape then set aside until needed.","STEP 2","Put the milk in a small saucepan and heat gently until simmering. Add the milk chocolate and dark chocolate, then stir until melted. Pour into a mug and top with a dollop of the double cream and scatter over a few mini white chocolate buttons to decorate."]
'Hot chocolate set', ["sunflower oil , for greasing","50g milk chocolate , chopped","100g dark chocolate , chopped","flaky sea salt","4 cinnamon sticks","4 empty 47g fromage frais pots , washed and dried","4 muffin cases","cellophane and twine or string , for wrapping","4 mugs","gift tags and pen, for labelling"], ["STEP 1","Very lightly grease the fromage frais pots with oil and set aside until needed.","STEP 2","Melt the milk chocolate in a bowl set over a pan of just-simmering water, stirring occasionally, then divide between the prepared pots. Place in the fridge or a cold place for around 30 mins or until set.","STEP 3","Once the milk chocolate layer is firm, melt the dark chocolate in a bowl as before, then pour it over the milk chocolate. Leave the pots to set for 15 mins, then sprinkle a pinch of flaky sea salt onto each.","STEP 4","Cut a hole in the bottom of each paper cake case and push a cinnamon stick through. Push the end of the stick into the middle of each pot so that the paper case is upside down – it will help to hold the cinnamon stick in place while it sets.","STEP 5","Leave to set overnight, then turn out and discard the pot and paper case. Wrap each in cellophane tied with twine. Tie each stick to a mug, or simply place inside the mug, and write a tag to read ‘Just add hot milk’."]
'Slow-cooker hot chocolate', ["1l milk","300ml double cream","200g dark chocolate, chopped","100g milk chocolate, chopped","scorched marshmallows, to serve","softly  whipped cream, to serve","grated  chocolate, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Pour the milk and double cream into the slow cooker. Add the dark chocolate and milk chocolate, then cover and cook on low for 2\xa0hrs, stirring halfway through cooking.","STEP 2","Remove\xa0the lid and stir again, then continue to cook for a further 15-20 mins. Ladle into mugs and top with the marshmallows, dollops of\xa0cream and grated chocolate."]
'Easy mulled wine', ["750ml bottle of red wine","1 sliced  clementine","1 cinnamon stick","1 star anise","3 dried figs","4 cloves","3 black peppercorns","50ml brandy"], ["STEP 1","Pour the red wine into a large saucepan. Add the clementine, cinnamon stick, star anise, dried figs, cloves and black peppercorns. Heat very gently until simmering, then turn off the heat.","STEP 2","Fish out the whole spices and peppercorns with a spoon, then stir in the brandy. Ladle into mugs, or heatproof glasses to serve. You could drop in a slice of clementine to each."]
'Appleberry mulled wine', ["2 x 75cl bottles red wine (such as Merlot; better quality wine makes all the difference)","1l good-quality cloudy  apple juice","115g caster sugar","1long cinnamon stick , snapped in half","2 star anise","3 tbsp orange Curaçao or Cointreau","a handful or so (about 100g/4oz) frozen mulled  fruit or fruits of the forest or Black Forest fruits","3small red-skinned  apples , sliced into rings"], ["STEP 1","Pour the wine and apple juice into a large saucepan and add the sugar, cinnamon stick and star anise. Heat gently, stirring once or twice, until the sugar has dissolved, then continue heating gently for another 15 minutes.","STEP 2","Just before serving, swirl in the Curaçao or Cointreau, throw in the frozen fruits and add the apple slices."]
'Mulled wine cocktail', ["100g/4oz light muscovado sugar","1 star anise","1 cinnamon stick","4 cloves","150ml water","1 lemon","2 clementines","150ml Cointreau","750ml/ 1¼pint bottle light red wine , such as Beaujolais","Twist of orange zest and a star anise, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Put 100g light muscovado sugar in a pan with 1 star anise, 1 cinnamon stick, 4 cloves and 150ml water. Bring slowly to the boil, stirring to dissolve the sugar.","STEP 2","Simmer for 2 mins, then pour into a large jug and leave to cool. Add 1 lemon and 2 clementines, both thinly sliced, to the jug along with 150ml Cointreau and a 750ml bottle light red wine, such as a Beaujolais. Stir well, then cover and chill for at least 2 hrs or overnight if you can.","STEP 3","Serve chilled or over ice, with a twist of orange zest and a star anise. If you’d like to serve a traditional warm mulled wine, there’s no need to chill – simply warm through without boiling and serve in heatproof glasses."]
'Mulled white wine', ["750ml white wine","100ml madeira","½ lemon , sliced","4 dried apricots","5 cardamom pods , bruised","1 star anise","1 vanilla pod , split in half","1 tbsp honey","a few drops rosewater"], ["STEP 1","Start by pouring the white wine and Madeira into a large saucepan. Add the lemon, dried apricots,\xa0cardamom pods, star anise,\xa0vanilla pod and honey. Bring to a simmer then strain into a jug through a fine sieve. Stir in the rosewater before serving."]
'Mulled wine', ["750ml bottle red wine","1 large  cinnamon stick, or 2 small ones","2 star anise","4 cloves","2 strips  lemon zest, pared using a vegetable peeler","4 tbsp caster sugar"], ["STEP 1","Put the red wine, cinnamon, star anise, cloves, lemon zest and sugar in a large pan. Cook on a low heat for 10 mins.","STEP 2","Remove from the heat and cool, leaving to infuse for about 30 mins.","STEP 3","To serve, heat without boiling, stir in the sloe gin (if using, see tip below) and pour into mugs or heatproof glasses."]
'White mulled wine', ["2 bottles cheap-ish  white wine , medium-dry is good","500ml bottle light  cider","150ml elderflower cordial","zest 2  lemons (pared into strips using a vegetable peeler)","2 cinnamon sticks","1 vanilla pod , split","4-5 tbsp caster sugar"], ["STEP 1","Put all the ingredients into a pan and heat until steaming but not boiling. Ladle into mugs or glasses to serve, while you keep the rest warm on a low heat."]
'Mulled wine kit', ["25cm square butter  muslin (available from department & hardware stores)","85g demerara sugar","1 tsp ground  ginger","½ tsp ground nutmeg","1 cinnamon stick","70cl bottle red wine","8 - 12 cloves","1 orange"], ["STEP 1","Put the muslin on a flat surface and tip the sugar, ginger and nutmeg into the centre. Tie into a pouch with fine string and attach to the neck of the wine bottle. Then attach the cinnamon stick to the bottle with a little raffia.","STEP 2","Stick the cloves into the orange and pack into a box lined with raffia or shredded paper, with the wine.","STEP 3","Tie a label to the wine bottle with the following instructions: ‘Tip the contents of the muslin bag into a pan with the wine, orange, cinnamon stick and 300ml/½pt water. Simmer for 5 mins, then serve.’"]
'Mulled rosé wine', ["750ml rosé wine","1 star anise","1 ball of stem ginger , sliced","½ tsp black peppercorns","5 allspice berries","¼ pink grapefruit , sliced","2 tbsp crème de cassis"], ["STEP 1","Pour the rosé wine into a large saucepan with the star anise, stem ginger,\xa0black peppercorns, allspice berries and pink grapefruit. Bring to a simmer over a medium heat then stir in the crème de cassis, strain into a jug then serve in heatproof glasses or cups."]
'Mulling syrup', ["250g caster or granulated sugar","2 oranges , halved","6 whole cloves","6 whole allspice","2 cinnamon sticks","¼ nutmeg , freshly grated","small piece ginger , sliced"], ["STEP 1","Put all the ingredients into a saucepan with 1 litre water and bring slowly to a simmer, making sure all the sugar has been completely dissolved. Turn down the heat and simmer for 20 mins. Leave to cool, then strain through a very fine sieve.","STEP 2","Sterilise your bottles by washing them in hot soapy water, rinsing well, then drying them in a warm oven. Meanwhile, rewarm the syrup until just hot, then pour into the bottles while still hot and seal.","STEP 3","Before giving away, add labels with serving instructions: Heat 400ml syrup with 750ml red wine or cider and some slices of orange or apple. Syrup will keep in a cool, dark place for up to 3 months."]
'Mulled wine brownies', ["100g dark chocolate","150g unsalted butter","200g light brown muscovado sugar","1 large egg and 1 egg yolk","100ml red wine","50g cocoa powder","100g plain flour","pinch of nutmeg and ground cloves","¼ tsp each cinnamon and ginger"], ["STEP 1","Heat the oven to 180C/160C fan/gas 4, butter and line the base of a 20cm x 20cm brownie tin with parchment paper. Melt the chocolate in the microwave or in a glass bowl over a pan of simmering water.","STEP 2","Mix the flour and cocoa powder together with the spices and a pinch of salt - set aside. Using an electric whisk, beat the butter and sugar together until super light and fluffy then whisk in the egg and yolk.","STEP 3","Pour in melted chocolate, wine and flour mixture and whisk until just combined.","STEP 4","Pour the batter into tin and bake for 15 mins until just set, don’t worry if there is a slight wobble in the centre, it will set up as they cool. Put into the fridge to firm up."]
'Slow cooker mulled wine', ["2 x 750ml bottles red wine","100ml Cointreau","peeled zest and juice of 2 large oranges","pared zest of 1 lemon","120g golden caster sugar","2 cinnamon sticks","3 star anise","4 cloves","slices of orange"], ["STEP 1","Put all the ingredients (except the slices of orange)\xa0in a slow cooker on low for 1 1/2 - 2hrs until hot. Ladle into heatproof glasses and serve with slices of orange. Using the \'keep warm\' setting (if your cooker has one) will ensure the mulled wine stays hot during the party."]
'Mudslide', ["50g dark chocolate","ice","60ml coffee-flavoured liqueur","60ml vodka","60ml Irish cream liqueur","100ml double cream"], ["STEP 1","Put two small tumblers in the fridge to chill overnight. Put 30g of the chocolate in a shallow bowl and melt in the microwave in short bursts.\xa0Dip the rim of the chilled glasses in the melted chocolate, then stand them upright so it gradually drips down the sides. Return to the fridge until you\'re ready to serve.","STEP 2","Fill a cocktail shaker with ice, then pour in\xa0the coffee-flavoured liqueur, vodka, Irish cream liqueur and double cream. Shake until the outside of the shaker is very cold.","STEP 3","Put a few ice cubes in\xa0the prepared glasses, then strain in the cocktail. Finely grate over the remaining chocolate and serve with a paper straw."]
'Salted caramel pecan sour', ["100g pecans , finely chopped","160g golden caster sugar","½ tsp sea salt flakes","Reyka vodka","3 egg whites","120ml fresh clementine juice (about 2-3 clementines)","18 drops chocolate bitters (we used Fee brothers Aztec chocolate bitters)","ice","6 dehydrated orange slices , to serve","good grating of nutmeg , to serve"], ["STEP 1","Toast the pecans in a dry saucepan for 1-2 mins, then take off the heat. Quickly add the sugar and 80ml water, stir rapidly to dissolve the sugar, add the salt, then leave the mixture to cool completely. Pour through a sieve to remove the pecans.","STEP 2","Pour the pecan salted caramel syrup, vodka, egg whites, clementine juice and bitters into a cocktail shaker. Shake hard for 30 secs to add volume to the egg white. Add some ice and shake again for a further 15 secs, then strain into rocks or coupe glasses. Garnish each with a dehydrated orange slice and grate fresh nutmeg over, to taste. Serve immediately."]
'Cuba Libre', ["½ lime","50ml rum , we used white rum","100ml cola","ice"], ["STEP 1","Cut ½ a lime into four small wedges. Squeeze the juice from two of the wedges into a tall glass. Drop the remaining wedges into the glass and fill with ice. Pour in the rum then fill up with cola and stir\xa0gently."]
'Easy bloody mary', ["small handful ice","200ml tomato juice","50ml vodka","2 tbsp amontillado sherry","1 tsp sherry vinegar , or to taste","pinch celery salt","Worcestershire sauce , to taste","Tabasco , to taste","squeeze of lemon juice","celery sticks and lemon wedges, to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Put the ice in a tall glass. Pour over the tomato juice, vodka, amontillado and sherry vinegar. Stir in the celery salt, then season to taste with the Worcestershire sauce, Tabasco and lemon juice. Taste again to see if more sherry vinegar is needed.","STEP 2","Serve with celery sticks, lemon wedges and a sprinkle of freshly ground black pepper, if you like."]
'Sex on the beach cocktail', ["ice","50ml vodka","25ml peach schnapps","2 oranges, juiced, plus 2 slices to garnish","50ml cranberry juice","glacé cherries, to garnish (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Fill two tall glasses with ice cubes. Pour the vodka, peach schnapps and fruit juices into a large jug and stir.","STEP 2","Divide the mixture between the\xa0two glasses and stir gently to combine. Garnish with the cocktail cherries and orange slices."]
'Vodka martini', ["60ml vodka","1 tbsp dry vermouth","olive or lemon peel, to garnish"], ["STEP 1","Stir the vodka, dry vermouth and a little ice together or put them in a cocktail shaker to combine.","STEP 2","Strain into a chilled martini glass. Serve with an olive on a cocktail stick or a twist of lemon peel."]
'Piña colada', ["120ml pineapple juice","60ml white rum","60ml coconut cream","wedge of pineapple, to garnish (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Pulse all the ingredients along with a handful of ice in a blender until smooth. Pour into a tall glass and garnish as you like."]
'Pimm’s', ["200ml Pimm\'s No. 1","600ml lemonade","mint sprigs, sliced cucumber, sliced orange and strawberries, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Fill a jug with ice and pour over the Pimm’s and lemonade. Give it a good stir then add the mint, cucumber and fruit."]
'Hurricane cocktail', ["50ml dark rum","50ml white rum","1 passion fruit","1 orange , juiced","1 lemon , juiced","50ml sugar syrup","2 tsp grenadine","4 cocktail cherries","2 orange slices"], ["STEP 1","Fill a cocktail shaker with ice\xa0then add the rums. Scoop the flesh and seeds from the passion fruit and add to the shaker along with the orange and lemon juices, sugar syrup and grenadine.","STEP 2","Shake well until the outside of the cocktail shaker feels icy cold. Fill two\xa0hurricane glasses with fresh ice then double strain the drink into the prepared glasses.","STEP 3","Garnish each one with an orange slice skewered onto a cocktail stick and a couple of cocktail cherries."]
'Sweet manhattan cocktail', ["50ml bourbon or rye whiskey","25ml rosso vermouth","5ml syrup from a jar of maraschino cherries (we used Luxardo)","2 dashes Angostura bitters","ice","maraschino cherry","a twist of pared lemon"], ["STEP 1","Stir the ingredients with ice in a mixing glass, then strain into a cocktail glass. Garnish and serve."]
'Rose-scented strawberry cocktails', ["100g strawberries , hulled and halved","50g caster sugar","2 tbsp rosewater","chilled bottle of Champagne or prosecco"], ["STEP 1","Blitz the strawberries with the sugar and rosewater in a blender or small food processor to form a purée. Add a spoon or two to each glass, then top up with your choice of chilled bubbly."]
'Passion fruit martini', ["2 ripe passion fruits (they should have a crinkly appearance), halved","60ml vanilla vodka","30ml passoa","1 tbsp lime juice","1 tbsp sugar syrup","prosecco , to serve"], ["STEP 1","Scoop the seeds from one of the passion fruits into the glass of a cocktail shaker, add the vodka, passoa, lime juice and sugar syrup. Add a handful of ice and shake well, strain into 2 martini glasses, top up with prosecco, then add half a passion fruit to each. Serve immediately."]
'Orange blossom Bellinis', ["175ml chilled blood orange juice","1 tbsp orange blossom water","chilled champagne or  prosecco","salted almonds and olives , to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Mix together orange juice and orange blossom water, then divide between 6 cocktail glasses. Top up with champagne or prosecco and serve with nibbles like olives and salted almonds."]
'Bloody mary recipe', ["large handful of ice","100ml vodka","500ml tomato juice","1 tbsp lemon juice, plus 2 slices to serve","few shakes Worcestershire sauce","few shakes Tabasco (smoked Tabasco is nice)","pinch celery salt","pinch black pepper","2 celery sticks, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Place the ice in a large jug. Measure the vodka, tomato juice and lemon juice and pour it straight onto the ice.","STEP 2","Add 3 shakes of Worcestershire sauce and Tabasco (or more if you like it very spicy) and a pinch of celery salt and pepper. Stir until the outside of the jug feels cold, then strain the cocktail into 2 tall glasses.","STEP 3","Top up with fresh ice, add a celery stick and lemon slice to both glasses and enjoy."]
'Apple, elderflower & gin cocktails', ["250ml gin","200ml elderflower cordial","1l cloudy apple juice","apple slices and ice, to serve"], ["STEP 1","In a jam jar, mix gin with cordial. When ready to serve, divide the mixture between 8 glasses, top up with apple juice, apple slices and ice."]
'Gooseberry & elderflower fizz', ["12 gooseberries","1 tbsp caster sugar","juice ½ lemon","3 tbsp elderflower cordial","chilled sparkling wine , for topping up (we used Prosecco)"], ["STEP 1","Tip gooseberries and sugar into a cocktail shaker or large jam jar with a lid. Using the end of a rolling pin, mush the gooseberries and sugar together. Add lemon juice, cordial and 4 ice cubes, pop on the lid and shake well. Strain into glasses and top up with white wine, then stir before serving."]
'Frozen caipirinha', ["2 limes , halved","6 tbsp golden granulated sugar","400g ice","200ml cachaça"], ["STEP 1","Cut each of the lime halves into four chunks. Put in a large mortar with the sugar and squish well with a pestle to break them down – they will release their juices, leaving you with a sweet lime syrup. Remove the lime peel, squeeze to release the last bits of juice, then discard. Transfer the lime syrup to a small plastic container and freeze for at least 4 hrs, ideally overnight.","STEP 2","When you’re ready to make the cocktail, put the ice in a blender suitable for crushing ice, then add the frozen syrup and cachaça. Blend at a high speed until smooth and thick. Transfer to cocktail glasses or tumblers and serve immediately."]
'Bitter orange & cardamom martinis', ["12 cardamom pods","6 tbsp Seville orange marmalade , plus more to serve","400ml vodka","125ml Cointreau","4 tbsp lemon juice","ice , to serve"], ["STEP 1","Bash 6 cardamom pods in a pestle and mortar until they split.","STEP 2","Melt the marmalade in a pan, then whisk in the vodka. Add the crushed pods. Don’t boil the mix, simply warm it for a few mins. Leave to infuse off the heat for 20 mins, then strain.","STEP 3","Add the Cointreau and lemon juice and chill (or keep in the freezer). Serve in glasses with a little more marmalade in the bottom, ice and a cardamom pod floating on top."]
'Frozen strawberry daiquiri', ["500g strawberries, hulled","200g ice","100ml rum","juice ½ lime","1 strawberry, halved","2 slices of limes","2 cocktail sticks"], ["STEP 1","Blend the strawberries then push the resulting puree through a sieve to remove some of the seeds. Tip the sieved puree into the blender again and add the ice, rum and lime juice.\xa0Blend again and divide the mixture between 2 Martini glasses.","STEP 2","Thread the lime slices and strawberry halves onto the cocktail sticks and place onto the edge of the glass, serve immediately."]
'Long Island iced tea', ["50ml vanilla vodka","50ml London dry gin","50ml reposado tequila","50ml rum","50ml triple sec","50-100ml fresh lime juice","ice","500ml cola","2 limes, cut into wedges"], ["STEP 1","Pour the vodka, gin, tequila, rum and\xa0triple sec into a large (1.5l) jug, and add lime juice to taste. Half fill the jug with ice, then stir until the outside feels cold.","STEP 2","Add the cola then stir to combine. Drop in the lime wedges.","STEP 3","Fill 4 tall glasses with more ice cubes and pour in the iced tea."]
'Bellini', ["500ml peach purée or peach nectar","1 bottle prosecco"], ["STEP 1","Put the peach puree in a Champagne flute up to about 1/3 full and slowly top up with Prosecco."]
'Blood orange & star anise fizz', ["4 blood oranges , quartered","120ml Grand Marnier","1 star anise","4 tsp tequila","prosecco or champagne, to top up"], ["STEP 1","Soak the blood oranges (skin on) in 100ml Grand Marnier for 3 hrs.","STEP 2","Heat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas 6 and tip the oranges, along with the soaking liquid, into a small roasting tin or ovenproof dish. Roast in the oven with the star anise for 30-40 mins or until the orange skins start to caramelise. Remove the skins and star anise, and purée the pulp in a food processor until smooth. Strain through a fine mesh sieve and chill until needed.","STEP 3","Mix 25ml of the purée with 1 tsp each of tequila and Grand Marnier per cocktail, and top with Prosecco or champagne to serve."]
'Black russian cocktail', ["50ml vodka","25ml coffee liqueur","ice","1 maraschino cherry","cola  to top up, chilled (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Put the vodka and the coffee liqueur into a tumbler filled with ice and stir gently for 30 secs - 1min. Add the cherry and serve. Top with a splash of chilled cola if you prefer a longer drink."]
'Tequila sunrise', ["2 tsp grenadine","ice","50ml tequila","1 tbsp triple sec","1 large orange, or 2 small ones, juiced","½ lemon, juiced","1 cocktail cherry"], ["STEP 1","Pour the grenadine into the base of a tall glass and set aside. Fill a cocktail shaker with ice and add the tequila, triple sec and fruit juices. Shake until the outside of the shaker feels cold.","STEP 2","Add a few ice cubes to the serving glass then carefully double strain the cocktail into it, trying not to disturb the grenadine layer too much. Add more ice if needed to fill the glass then garnish with a cherry on a stick or cocktail umbrella."]
'Watermelon gin spritzer', ["2large limes","100g watermelon","2 tbsp gin","tonic  water"], ["STEP 1","Cut the limes into 16 pieces. Squeeze 2 pieces of lime into each of the 8 glasses, then drop in the squeezed flesh. Chop the watermelon and divide among the glasses, and throw in some ice cubes. Pour gin over each and top up with chilled tonic water."]
'Sloe gin cocktail', ["50ml sloe gin","25ml lemon juice","25ml gin","ice (crushed and cubes)","100g white caster sugar","1 tbsp juniper berries"], ["STEP 1","Start by making the juniper syrup. Put the sugar in a small saucepan, then add 100ml water and the juniper berries. Bring to the boil, then take off the heat and gently squash the berries in the liquid using a potato masher. Leave to steep until completely cold, then strain into a sterilised bottle or jar. Will keep in the fridge for up to 2 weeks.","STEP 2","Put the sloe gin, lemon juice, gin and 2 tsp of the syrup in a cocktail shaker with a few ice cubes. Shake well and strain into a tumbler filled with crushed ice. Serve immediately."]
'Woo woo', ["50ml vodka","25ml peach schnapps","100ml cranberry juice","few drops fresh lime juice","ice","wedge of lime"], ["STEP 1","Fill a cocktail shaker with ice then add the vodka, peach schnapps, cranberry juice and a few drops of lime juice. Shake really well then strain into a tumbler with extra ice. Garnish with a wedge of lime."]
'Sparkling mint & lemon juleps', ["85g golden caster sugar","4 tbsp fresh  lemon juice","1 bottle of  chilled, sparkling wine  (Cava is a good choice)","20g/1oz pack fresh mint"], ["STEP 1","Put the sugar and lemon juice in a small pan and heat gently to dissolve the sugar. Simmer for 2 minutes to make a syrup. Remove from the heat and leave to cool. This can be made in advance and kept in the fridge for up to a week.","STEP 2","To serve, pour the lemon syrup into 6 champagne flutes or tall glasses, top up each glass with the chilled sparkling wine, then stir quickly to mix before serving with mint sprigs tucked in the top."]
'Summer punch', ["125ml lemon juice","50g caster sugar","250ml elderflower liqueur (we used St Germain)","250ml vodka","500ml apple juice (Bradley is best if you like it sharp)","125ml sparkling water","ice","fresh summer herbs like lemon verbena, mint and basil (optional)","lemon slices (optional)"], ["STEP 1","In a bowl, mix the lemon juice and sugar until the sugar dissolves. Transfer into a large serving bowl, add the other liquid ingredients, fill to the top with ice and stir gently. Serve immediately, with herbs and lemon slices, if you like."]
'Frozen margarita', ["50ml tequila","25ml triple sec (we used Cointreau)","25ml lime juice","15ml sugar syrup (see \'Goes well with\' below)","large handful of ice","wedge of lime , to garnish"], ["STEP 1","Put all the ingredients except the lime wedge in a blender and blitz until smooth. Tip into a cocktail, margarita or rocks glass, garnish and serve."]
'New York sour', ["50ml rye whiskey","25ml lemon juice","2 tsp maple syrup","dash  orange bitters","1 tbsp egg white","ice","20ml red wine"], ["STEP 1","Pour the whiskey, lemon juice, maple syrup and bitters into a cocktail shaker. Stir the egg white with a fork to loosen it, then\xa0add it to the shaker. Shake really well to froth up the egg white. Add\xa0a good handful of ice and shake again.","STEP 2","Once the outside of the shaker is really cold,\xa0double strain into a glass filled with ice.","STEP 3","Slowly pour the red wine on top and leave\xa0to settle for a few moments – the wine\xa0will\xa0rise to just under the frothy egg white."]
'Elderflower & herb cooler', ["2 thyme sprigs , leaves only","2 rosemary sprigs, leaves only","8 edible flowers (such as pansies, rose petals and borage)","50ml elderflower cordial","150ml elderflower liqueur","150ml gin","ice","330ml can sparkling water"], ["STEP 1","Pop the herbs and flowers into the holes of an ice cube tray, fill with water and freeze for 2-3 hrs or until frozen solid.","STEP 2","Pour the elderflower cordial, elderflower liqueur, gin and a large handful of ice cubes into a large jug. Stir until the outside of the jug feels cold then strain into 4 tall glasses or champagne flutes. Top with the soda and add a few more ice cubes and the floral ones too. Serve immediately."]
'Apple prosecco punch', ["400ml cloudy apple juice","200ml vodka","juice 2 lemons","750ml prosecco","ice","1 green apple , cored and finely sliced","1 lemon , sliced"], ["STEP 1","Pour the apple juice, vodka and lemon juice into a punch bowl and chill for 1-2 hrs.","STEP 2","When you’re ready to serve add the prosecco, ice and apple and lemon slices to garnish."]
'Coco fizz', ["25ml coconut rum","50ml coconut water","juice of ½ lime","ice","50ml prosecco"], ["STEP 1","Put the coconut rum, coconut water and lime juice into a cocktail shaker, add ice and shake until the outside of the shaker is icy-cold to the touch. Strain into a chilled coupe glass, top with the Prosecco and serve."]
'Earl Grey martini', ["1 tbsp good loose-leaf Earl Grey tea","700ml bottle of decent gin","ice"], ["STEP 1","Put the Earl Grey tea in a large jug. Pour the gin over and stir with a long-handled spoon for about 45 secs.","STEP 2","Strain the gin through a tea strainer over a funnel back into the bottle. You’ll see small particles of leaf still suspended in the gin. Rinse out the jug and, using a coffee filter or some muslin inside the funnel, strain the gin a second time to remove all the particles. In this way, the gin will be stable and the flavour won’t change – it’ll be good for months and months until the final sip.","STEP 3","To serve, shake or stir over ice – I like how the flavours change as the drink dilutes."]
'Melon & cucumber punch', ["1 Galia melon","juice 1 lemon","100ml Pimm\'s","50ml orange liqueur (we used Cointreau)","750ml white wine","½ cucumber , sliced","small bunch mint","300ml sparkling water or sparkling wine","ice"], ["STEP 1","Cut the melon in half and scoop out and discard the seeds. Using a melon baller cut the fruit into spheres and place in a large punch bowl. Add the lemon juice, Pimm\'s, orange liqueur and white wine then chill in the fridge for 1-2 hrs.","STEP 2","To serve, add the cucumber pieces, mint sprigs and top with sparkling water and ice."]
'Pink gin iced tea', ["1 chamomile tea bag","100ml pink gin","100ml spiced rum","100ml elderflower cordial","100ml pink grapefruit juice","ice","thyme sprigs, to garnish"], ["STEP 1","Brew the chamomile tea bag with 500ml boiling water, steep for 2-3 mins or following\xa0pack instructions. Remove the bag and leave to cool for 5 mins.","STEP 2","Pour into a large jug with the pink gin, rum, elderflower cordial and juice. Add ice and stir, then add the thyme sprigs and stir again before serving."]
'Elderflower & cucumber G&Ts', ["10 cm piece of cucumber","100ml elderflower cordial","100ml gin","1l bottle tonic water , to serve"], ["STEP 1","Peel 2 long strips from the piece of cucumber and put in a small tupperware for transporting. Grate the remaining cucumber into a sieve set over a bowl and press down on it with the back of a spoon to extract as much juice as possible. Add the elderflower cordial and gin to the cucumber juice and put in a bottle ready for travelling. At your picnic, wind the strips of cucumber around inside 2 glasses, pour in a quarter of the cucumber gin mixture, and top up with with a quarter of the bottle of tonic water to serve."]
'Gimlet cocktail', ["50ml homemade lime syrup (see recipe, below) or lime cordial","ice","50ml London dry gin","slice of lime and an edible flower, to garnish (optional)","2 limes , grated zest and juice","200g caster sugar"], ["STEP 1","Put a martini or coupe glass in the fridge to chill.","STEP 2","Pour 50ml of the lime syrup (see recipe, below) or cordial into a jug or tall glass and add a few ice cubes and the gin. Stir until the outside of the container feels very cold.","STEP 3","Strain the mixture into your chilled glass and garnish with a slice of lime and an edible flower.","STEP 4","For the homemade lime syrup, put the lime zest into a saucepan. Squeeze the juice from both limes into a measuring jug – stop when you get to about 60ml, then top it up with water so you have 100ml of liquid in total. Pour this into your pan with the caster sugar. Heat very gently, stirring occasionally just until the sugar has dissolved, but don’t let it boil. Strain the mixture into a heatproof jug and leave to cool. Makes 280-300ml. Lasts up to two weeks."]
'Sidecar', ["50ml cognac","25ml triple sec","25ml lemon juice","handful of ice","dash of Angostura bitters (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Put a coupe glass in the fridge to chill. Tip all of the ingredients into a cocktail\xa0shaker.","STEP 2","Shake well, until the outside of the shaker feels cold, then strain the cocktail into the chilled glass. If the lemon juice is too sharp, add the bitters to taste."]
'Cucumber, mint & melon punch', ["1 large cucumber , peeled and chopped into small chunks","small bunch mint , leaves picked","500ml vodka","juice 6 lime , plus wedges to serve","200g white caster sugar","1-2 small melons (we used 1/2 honeydew, 1/2 cantaloupe and 1/2 watermelon)","1l sparkling water , chilled"], ["STEP 1","Put the cucumber and half the mint in a large bowl or jug, and pour over the vodka. Cover and leave to steep for at least 24 hrs or for up to 1 week in the fridge, stirring every few days. Strain through a fine sieve.","STEP 2","Pour the vodka, lime juice and sugar into a larger jug. Stir well.","STEP 3","Using a melon baller, scoop out as many melon balls as you can. Add them to the jug and leave to steep for 30 mins-1 hr in the fridge. Top up with sparkling water and add the remaining mint leaves just before serving with extra lime wedges."]
'Mulled wine cocktail', ["100g/4oz light muscovado sugar","1 star anise","1 cinnamon stick","4 cloves","150ml water","1 lemon","2 clementines","150ml Cointreau","750ml/ 1¼pint bottle light red wine , such as Beaujolais","Twist of orange zest and a star anise, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Put 100g light muscovado sugar in a pan with 1 star anise, 1 cinnamon stick, 4 cloves and 150ml water. Bring slowly to the boil, stirring to dissolve the sugar.","STEP 2","Simmer for 2 mins, then pour into a large jug and leave to cool. Add 1 lemon and 2 clementines, both thinly sliced, to the jug along with 150ml Cointreau and a 750ml bottle light red wine, such as a Beaujolais. Stir well, then cover and chill for at least 2 hrs or overnight if you can.","STEP 3","Serve chilled or over ice, with a twist of orange zest and a star anise. If you’d like to serve a traditional warm mulled wine, there’s no need to chill – simply warm through without boiling and serve in heatproof glasses."]
'White russian', ["60ml vodka","2 tbsp Kahlúa","1 tbsp cream"], ["STEP 1","Mix together all the ingredients. Put some ice cubes in a small tumbler and pour the cocktail over the top."]
'Caipirinha', ["2 limes , chopped into wedges, plus extra lime wedges to serve (optional)","6 tbsp golden caster sugar","200ml cachaça","few handfuls crushed ice"], ["STEP 1","Put the lime wedges in a large jug with the sugar, then use a muddler\xa0or the end of a rolling pin\xa0to break them down. Release as much juice from the wedges as possible,\xa0and let it mix with the sugar to create a syrup – you can also do this with a large pestle and mortar. Discard the lime peel.","STEP 2","Divide the syrup and cachaça between four glasses, then top with the crushed ice. Serve garnished with\xa0lime wedges, if you like."]
'Mango & pineapple mojito', ["50g pineapple pieces","50g chopped mango","3 limes , chopped","2 tbsp light brown soft sugar","2 mint sprigs , leaves picked","ice","150ml white rum","200ml pineapple rum","600ml sparkling water"], ["STEP 1","Tip the\xa0pineapple, mango,\xa0limes and\xa0sugar into a large jug and muddle together. Bruise and add the mint leaves, then top with ice. Stir in the white rum, pineapple rum and sparkling water."]
'Drivers’ punch', ["100g cranberry","100ml/3½fl oz cranberry juice","500ml blood  orange juice (Sanguinello)","juice of 1 lime","thin wedges of lime","thin wedges of orange","mint  sprigs","600ml Appletise, sparkling  apple juice  drink"], ["STEP 1","Put the cranberries into a medium size, rigid freezer container, cover with water (by about 2.5cm), freeze until solid.","STEP 2","Mix the cranberry juice in a large jug (about 1.5 litre) with the orange and lime juices.","STEP 3","To serve, smash the sheet of frozen cranberries into shards and put in the bottom of eight highball glasses. Put a wedge of lime and orange and a mint sprig in each glass, then pour in the mixed fruit juices and top up with Appletise."]
'Strawberry mojito', ["9-10 strawberries","2 limes , chopped","2 tbsp granulated sugar","2 mint sprigs , leaves picked","ice","350ml white rum","600ml sparkling water"], ["STEP 1","Muddle the strawberries, limes and\xa0sugar in a large jug. Bruise the mint leaves and add to the jug with\xa0a pinch of black pepper. Add lots of ice and stir in the rum and sparkling water."]
'Pink grapefruit punch', ["200ml pink grapefruit juice","100ml gin","½ small bunch thyme","50ml Campari","25ml red vermouth","750ml rosé wine","1 tbsp honey , plus more to taste","ice"], ["STEP 1","Put all the ingredients together in a punch bowl, add lots of ice, stir gently and serve immediately."]
'Mai tai', ["2 tbsp white  rum","2 tbsp dark rum","2 tbsp triple sec","1 tbsp grenadine","1 tbsp orgeat or almond syrup (we used Monin almond syrup, available online)","juice of half a  lime","maraschino cherry"], ["STEP 1","Stir all the ingredients together in a jug or shake them in a cocktail shaker. Put a few cubes of ice in a tumbler, pour over the liquid and garnish with a cherry."]
'Eastern breeze', ["ice","300ml vodka","24 mint leaves","seeds from 1 pomegranate (about 1 heaped tsp per glass)","600ml apple juice"], ["STEP 1","Fill six highball or big wine glasses with ice and divide 300ml vodka between them. Add 24 mint leaves, seeds from 1 pomegranate (about 1 heaped tsp per glass) and 600ml apple juice, then stir with a straw or chopstick to muddle."]
'Vodka & cranberry blush', ["200ml/7fl oz each vodka and Cointreau","600ml cranberry juice","400ml orange juice","strips of peel from 2-3 limes","crushed ice , to serve"], ["STEP 1","Pour the vodka and Cointreau into a jug, then add the cranberry juice and orange juice. Stir well.","STEP 2","Pare strips of peel from 2-3 limes. Fill 12 glasses with the crushed ice, then pour over the cocktail. Finish each glass with a strip of lime peel."]
'Pink negroni', ["35ml pink gin","25ml rose vermouth , or sweet white vermouth","15ml Aperol","ice","wedge of pink grapefruit and a basil leaf, to garnish"], ["STEP 1","Combine the pink gin, vermouth and Aperol in a tumbler with a small handful of ice. Stir until the outside of the glass feels cold.","STEP 2","Garnish with a wedge of pink grapefruit and a basil leaf."]
'Easy sangria', ["2 oranges , chopped","2 pears , chopped","2 lemons , 1 chopped, 1 juiced","200g red berries , chopped (we used strawberries and cherries)","3 tbsp caster sugar","1 tsp cinnamon","ice","750ml bottle light red wine","100ml Spanish brandy","300ml sparkling water"], ["STEP 1","Put the chopped fruit in a bowl and\xa0sprinkle over the sugar and cinnamon, then stir to coat. Cover and leave to macerate in the fridge\xa0for at least 1 hr, or ideally overnight.","STEP 2","Fill a large jug with ice. Stir the macerated fruit mixture to ensure the sugar is dissolved, then\xa0tip into the jug with the wine and brandy. Stir, then top up with the sparkling water and serve."]
'Blueberry mojito', ["100g blueberries","3 lemons , chopped","2 tbsp granulated sugar","2 mint sprigs , leaves picked","350ml white rum","600ml sparkling water"], ["STEP 1","Put the\xa0blueberries, lemons and\xa0sugar in a jug and muddle. Bruise the mint leaves and add them to the jug with lots of ice. Pour over the rum and sparkling water and stir together."]
'Dark & stormy coffee cocktail', ["25ml dark rum","25ml tequila","ice","ginger beer","2 tbsp freshly brewed espresso"], ["STEP 1","Fill a highball glass with ice and pour in the rum and tequila. Stir then top with ginger beer. Slowly pour in the espresso."]
'Rhubarb gin', ["1kg pink rhubarb stalks","400g caster sugar (don\'t use golden - it muddies the colour)","800ml gin"], ["STEP 1","Wash the rhubarb, trim the stalks and discard the base and any leaves. Cut the stalks into 3cm lengths. Put in a large jar with the sugar. Shake everything around, put the lid on and leave overnight. The sugar will draw the juice out of the rhubarb.","STEP 2","After 24 hrs, add the gin, seal and shake everything around. Leave for about 4 weeks before drinking. You can strain the liquor off through a muslin-lined sieve and transfer to a bottle, but I often just leave the rhubarb and booze in the jar and ladle it into drinks that way. Over time the rhubarb and the gin go a much paler colour – this doesn’t look as dramatic. The upside is you that have to get through it fairly quickly!"]
'Caipirinhas with pineapple', ["1 small pineapple","juice 4  limes","bunch fresh mint","8 tbsp golden caster sugar","400ml cachaça liqueur, or light rum","crushed  ice for 8 glasses","800ml pineapple juice"], ["STEP 1","Core the pineapple and cut into 3cm chunks. Place 8 small handfuls of pineapple, the lime juice, half the mint and the sugar into a pitcher and mash up with the end of a rolling pin or a fat wooden spoon.","STEP 2","Pour in the cachaça and a little crushed ice, then pour into 8 glasses, and add more crushed ice. Pour the pineapple juice over, filling to the rim. Garnish the glasses with extra mint sprigs and cocktail sticks with pieces of pineapple threaded on."]
'Bergamot mojito', ["300g golden caster sugar","12 mint leaves","6 limes , juiced","1 bergamot , zested and juiced (available from ocado.com)","150ml golden rum"], ["STEP 1","Mix the sugar with 1 ltr water in a medium saucepan. Bring to the boil, then cool to room temperature.","STEP 2","Blend the mint, lime juice and bergamot zest and juice in a food processor, then add the cooled syrup and blend until combined. Pour into a plastic container and freeze, stirring with a fork every 30 mins until frozen.","STEP 3","To serve, scoop the granita into chilled glasses and pour the rum over."]
'Espresso martini', ["100g golden caster sugar","ice","100ml vodka","50ml freshly brewed espresso coffee","50ml coffee liqueur (we used Kahlua)","4 coffee beans (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Start by making the sugar syrup. Put the caster sugar in a small pan over a medium heat and pour in 50ml water. Stir, and bring to the boil.","STEP 2","Turn off the heat and allow the mixture to cool. Put 2 martini glasses in the fridge to chill.","STEP 3","Once the sugar syrup is cold, pour 1 tbsp\xa0into a cocktail shaker along with a handful of ice, the vodka, espresso and coffee liqueur. Shake until the outside of the cocktail shaker feels icy cold.","STEP 4","Strain into the chilled glasses. Garnish each one with coffee beans if you like."]
'Old fashioned', ["2 tsp sugar syrup or 1 tsp granulated sugar","1-2 dashes Angostura bitters","splash of water","60ml Scotch whisky or bourbon","soda water (optional)","orange slice","maraschino cherry (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Put the sugar, bitters and water in a small tumbler. Mix until the sugar dissolves if using granulated. Fill your glass with ice and stir in the whisky. Add a splash of soda water if you like and mix. Garnish with the orange and cherry."]
'Rhubarb & custard cocktail', ["85g caster sugar","300g chopped rhubarb","100ml vodka","100ml rhubarb syrup (see above)","1 length rhubarb","30ml advocaat","75ml lemonade"], ["STEP 1","To make the rhubarb syrup, put the caster sugar in a saucepan with 75ml water. Heat very gently, so the sugar disappears but the water doesn’t bubble. Tip in the chopped rhubarb, cover with a tight-fitting lid and increase the heat a little so it begins to boil. Simmer, covered, for about 5 mins until the rhubarb is very tender but not disintegrating.","STEP 2","Turn off the heat, and tip the pan’s contents into a fine sieve over a bowl. Use a wooden spoon to gently squeeze the rhubarb so that you get all the juices, but no pulp. Tip back into the pan and boil rapidly for a few mins until just syrupy. Pour into a jug – you should have about 125ml. Leave to cool completely. Any leftovers will keep in the fridge for up to 1 month.","STEP 3","Chill 4 cocktail glasses with ice or in your freezer. Shake the vodka and 100ml of the rhubarb syrup together with ice until mixed and chilled down. Make small shreds of rhubarb using a vegetable peeler and place into iced water – this will make them curl up.","STEP 4","In a separate jug, whisk together the advocaat and lemonade with more ice to lighten. Divide the vodka and rhubarb mixture between the glasses, straining through a small sieve to catch the ice.","STEP 5","Carefully pour 25ml of your advocaat mixture into each glass over an upsidedown spoon (the mixture should float on the surface of the vodka syrup mixture). Drain the rhubarb shreds well and use to garnish your cocktails."]
'Courgette martini', ["1 courgette , coarsely grated","juice 2 lemons","2 tbsp caster sugar","25ml vermouth","50ml gin","ice","mint leaf to garnish"], ["STEP 1","Mix the courgette with the lemon juice and sugar and leave to steep for 1 hr. In the meantime, place a martini glass in the fridge to chill.","STEP 2","Strain the courgette mixture through a sieve into a jug. Fill a cocktail shaker with ice then add 25ml of the courgette syrup followed by the vermouth and gin. Stir gently a few times then strain into your chilled glass. Garnish with a mint leaf and serve."]
'Cosmopolitan cocktail', ["45ml lemon vodka","15ml triple sec","30ml cranberry juice","10ml lime juice","ice","orange zest, or a lime wedge on the rim of the glass."], ["STEP 1","Shake ingredients in a cocktail shaker with ice and strain into a cocktail glass.","STEP 2","To make the garnish: hold a 3cm round piece of orange zest about 10cm above your cosmo and very carefully wave it over a lit match or lighter flame. Bend the outer edge of the zest in towards the flame so that the orange oils are released, then drop the zest into your drink."]
'Daiquiri', ["50ml white rum","25ml lime juice","10ml sugar syrup","ice"], ["STEP 1","Shake all the ingredients in a cocktail shaker and strain into a cocktail glass.","Strawberry daiquiri\\nThis cocktail should only be attempted with fruit that’s really ripe and sweet – if the berries are the big, bland variety from the chiller cabinet, the end result will just taste of mush. Allow one large handful of hulled strawberries for each cocktail. Place them in the empty shaker and give them a gentle crush with a muddler or pestle, then add the other ingredients and shake as normal and strain into your cocktail glass. Out of season, you could also make a version of this drink using Funkin strawberry purée which will be almost as good.\xa0\\nHemingway’s ‘Papa Doble’ daiquiri\\nThe writer Ernest Hemingway drank at El Floridita in Havana so often they ended up creating a daiquiri recipe especially for him called the Papa Doble, made with a quadruple measure of white rum, lime, grapefruit juice and maraschino liqueur. I don’t think many of us could handle a drink this size – as delicious as it is – so I’ve scaled it back a bit: 50ml white rum, 15ml pink grapefruit juice, 15ml lime juice, 15ml Luxardo maraschino liqueur, 5ml sugar syrup, shaken and strained into a cocktail glass or blended with ice, depending on what you prefer.\xa0\\nLa Terraza’s blue daiquiri\\nAnother place Hemingway liked to drink when he went fishing was a little waterside bar about 10 miles outside Havana called La Terraza. La Terraza’s signature daiquiri is made with blue curaçao, so it’s the colour of a lagoon. You can make one too, simply by substituting 15ml Bols Blue curaçao in a normal daiquiri in place of the sugar syrup. A delicious guilty pleasure on a summer’s day, especially with a cocktail umbrella."]
'Peach punch', ["4 tbsp caster sugar","zest and juice 1½ lemon","750ml bottle   rosé wine","150ml peach schnapps","1 peach , sliced","1⁄2  lemon , sliced","ice cubes","1l  bottle of  soda water  or tonic"], ["STEP 1","Heat the sugar with the lemon zest and 100ml water until the sugar dissolves. Cool, pour into a jug and add the wine, lemon juice and schnapps.","STEP 2","When ready to serve add plenty of ice and the fruit and top up with the soda or tonic to taste."]
'Claridge’s sazerac', ["2 drops of absinthe (we used Pernod)","30ml rye whiskey (we used Michter’s)","30ml cognac (we used Rémy Martin VSOP)","2 drops of Peychaud’s bitters","5ml sugar syrup","1 strip of lemon peel , to garnish"], ["STEP 1","Put a tumbler in the freezer. When it’s freezing cold, pour in the absinthe, swirl it so it thinly coats the inside of the glass, then tip it away. This is called rinsing.","STEP 2","Stir the remaining ingredients, except the lemon peel garnish, together in a mixing glass, then strain into the prepared tumbler.","STEP 3","Garnish with the lemon peel and serve."]
'Mojito recipe', ["juice of 1 lime","1 tsp granulated sugar","small handful mint leaves, plus extra sprig to serve","60ml white rum","soda water, to taste"], ["STEP 1","Muddle the lime juice, sugar and mint leaves in a small jug, crushing the mint as you go – you can use the end of a rolling pin for this. Pour into a tall glass and add a handful of ice.","STEP 2","Pour over the rum, stirring with a long-handled spoon. Top up with soda water, garnish with mint and serve."]
'Raspberry cordial', ["500g raspberry","500g caster sugar","3 tbsp red wine vinegar"], ["STEP 1","Put the raspberries in a pan with the sugar and vinegar. Mash over a low heat for 10 mins until smooth and syrupy. Rub through a sieve into a clean pan.","STEP 2","Tip the seeds from the sieve into a bowl and stir in 300ml water, then sieve again to remove the last of the pulp from seeds. Pour the liquid into the pan with the sieved pulp, stir well and boil for 1 min. Pour into small sterilised bottles and seal. The cordial will keep unopened for a few months. Once opened, store in the fridge."]
'Blueberry & mint iced tea', ["5 peppermint tea bags","140g blueberries","2 tbsp golden caster sugar","large handful ice","handful mint leaves","a few lemon slices"], ["STEP 1","Boil the kettle and put the tea bags in a jug. Pour over 500ml boiling water and leave to steep for 5 mins. Meanwhile, put 100g blueberries in a jug, add the sugar and lightly crush with the end of a rolling pin or a potato masher. Remove the tea bags from the water, pour the tea over the blueberries and top up with another 300ml cold water. Add a large handful of ice to cool quickly, or chill until cold.","STEP 2","When you’re ready to pack your picnic, pour the iced tea into bottles or flasks. Add a few sprigs of fresh mint, some lemon slices and the remaining blueberries. Seal and store in a cooler bag."]
'Peach iced tea', ["200g granulated sugar","5 ripe peaches , 4 stoned and chopped, 1 sliced to serve","4 teabags"], ["STEP 1","Tip the sugar into a pan with 250ml water. Bring to the boil slowly, ensuring the sugar is fully dissolved. Add the chopped peaches and cook until very soft. Remove from the heat, mash the peaches with a fork, and leave to infuse for 1 hr.","STEP 2","Sieve the syrup through a fine sieve into a jug, mashing the fruit to release all the liquid. The syrup will keep in the fridge for one week.","STEP 3","Put the teabags in a large heatproof jug and pour over 2 litres boiling water. Leave to steep for 4 mins, then carefully remove the teabags. Leave to cool, then transfer to the fridge until chilled.","STEP 4","Stir the peach syrup into the iced tea with some ice, or pour a little of the syrup into tall glasses and add the tea. Top up with more water, sparkling water or ice. Add peach slices to serve."]
'Drivers’ punch', ["100g cranberry","100ml/3½fl oz cranberry juice","500ml blood  orange juice (Sanguinello)","juice of 1 lime","thin wedges of lime","thin wedges of orange","mint  sprigs","600ml Appletise, sparkling  apple juice  drink"], ["STEP 1","Put the cranberries into a medium size, rigid freezer container, cover with water (by about 2.5cm), freeze until solid.","STEP 2","Mix the cranberry juice in a large jug (about 1.5 litre) with the orange and lime juices.","STEP 3","To serve, smash the sheet of frozen cranberries into shards and put in the bottom of eight highball glasses. Put a wedge of lime and orange and a mint sprig in each glass, then pour in the mixed fruit juices and top up with Appletise."]
'Pear & rose punch', ["1l pear juice","1 vanilla pod","1 tbsp golden caster sugar","4 cardamom pods","few slices root ginger","25ml raw apple cider vinegar","½ tsp rosewater","250ml sparkling water","ice","rosemary sprigs","thyme , leaves picked","sliced red pear","handful frozen redcurrants"], ["STEP 1","Pour the pear juice into a large pan. Add the\xa0vanilla pod, golden caster sugar,\xa0cardamom pods and\xa0root ginger, then bring to a simmer. Leave to cool completely, then strain into a punch bowl or jug.","STEP 2","Add the raw apple cider vinegar, rosewater and\xa0sparkling water. Garnish with rosemary sprigs, thyme, sliced red pear and a handful of frozen redcurrants. Add ice and serve."]
'Gin-free G&T', ["5 cardamom pods","½ cucumber","1 chamomile teabag","½ bunch mint leaves , plus extra to garnish","1 strip lemon zest","5 cloves","½ bunch rosemary","tonic water , to top up","ice","few pomegranate seeds , to garnish (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Bruise the\xa0cardamom pods and slice the\xa0cucumber. Put them both in a large jug and add the\xa0chamomile teabag,\xa0mint leaves,\xa0lemon zest,\xa0cloves and rosemary. Top up with 500ml cold water. Leave to infuse in the fridge for 2-4 hrs. To serve, strain the infused water and pour 50ml of it into each glass. Top up with tonic water and lots of ice. Garnish each one with a few more mint leaves and pomegranate seeds, if you like."]
'Non-alcoholic mulled wine', ["500ml pomegranate juice","25g golden caster sugar","handful of frozen blackberries","250ml apple juice","1 cinnamon stick","1 star anise","4 cloves","3 black peppercorns","1 orange, quartered"], ["STEP 1","Put the pomegranate juice, sugar, blackberries and apple juice in a saucepan. Add the\xa0cinnamon,\xa0star anise,\xa0cloves, peppercorns and orange. Heat gently until simmering. Taste for sweetness, then strain into heatproof glasses."]
'Rhubarb cordial', ["300g golden caster sugar","zest and juice 1 orange","zest and juice 1 lemon","450g rhubarb , chopped","1 slice fresh root ginger , peeled"], ["STEP 1","Put the sugar in a large saucepan with 300ml water. Bring to a simmer then add the zest and juice of both the orange and the lemon along with the rhubarb and the ginger.","STEP 2","Cook the mixture over a medium heat until the rhubarb is falling apart.","STEP 3","Pour the mixture through a sieve lined with muslin into a clean heatproof jug then transfer to sterilised bottles. Keeps in the fridge for up to 1 month.","STEP 4","Serve approx. 25ml of cordial per 100ml sparkling water, or to taste."]
'Tropical punch cups', ["½ fresh pineapple , cut into chunks","2 mangoes , peeled and cut into chunks","2 starfruit , sliced","150ml guava juice (or other tropical fruit juice)","50ml ginger beer"], ["STEP 1","Mix together all the fruit in a large bowl with the guava juice, then chill until ready to serve. At the last minute, pour over the ginger beer and serve with small cups or bowls on the side for spooning the drinks and fruit into."]
'Negroni mocktail', ["½  grapefruit (approx 125g)","1 slice orange","125g caster sugar","3 cardamom pods , lightly crushed","pinch coriander seeds","few drops red food colouring","ice","25ml white grape juice","1 slice orange (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Chop the grapefruit into small chunks and put them into a saucepan along with the orange slice, sugar, 125ml water, the cardamom pods and coriander seeds. Heat the mixture until simmering and cook for around 5 mins, crushing the fruit pieces with the back of a wooden spoon as it starts to soften\xa0to release the juices. Once the fruit has softened and the white pith has faded, take it off the heat and leave to cool. If you like you can add a splash of red food colouring to the syrup at this point.","STEP 2","Once the syrup mixture has cooled, strain it and discard the spices and fruit pieces. Fill a tumbler with ice and pour in 25ml of the syrup, the grape juice and 25ml cold water. Stir gently until the outside of the tumbler feels cold, then garnish with a slice of orange, if you like."]
'Fruity mocktail', ["handful of green grapes","handful of blueberries","4 tbsp grenadine","300-400ml orange juice","sparkling water , to top up","4 bamboo skewers"], ["STEP 1","Thread the grapes and blueberries onto the skewers to make stirrers.","STEP 2","Pour the grenadine into four glasses. Gently tip the glasses and pour the orange juice down the inside of the glasses so it sits on top of the grenadine. Top up with sparking water, and add the stirrers to serve."]
'Gooseberry & mint lemonade', ["250g caster or  granulated sugar","3 large lemons , plus more to serve","350g gooseberry , topped and tailed, then halved","mint leaves from 3 sprigs, plus extra to serve","ice and  sparkling water , to serve"], ["STEP 1","In a large pan, gently melt the sugar in 250ml water. Meanwhile, using a vegetable peeler, pare away a few long strips of lemon zest. Squeeze the juice to give about 100ml.","STEP 2","Add the zest, juice, gooseberries and mint leaves to the pan, and bring to a simmer. Cook for 5-10 mins until the gooseberries are very soft, then mash with a potato masher and leave to cool. Strain through a sieve, pressing the flesh well to extract the juices, then chill thoroughly.","STEP 3","To serve, dilute 4 tbsp of the lemonade base with 100ml sparkling water (or to taste), adding extra ice, lemon and mint."]
'Alcohol-free passion fruit martini', ["3 passion fruits , halved","1 lemon , juiced","1 egg white","100ml alcohol-free spirit","2 tsp sugar syrup","handful of ice","sparkling grape juice , to serve"], ["STEP 1","Scoop the flesh from four of the passion fruit halves into a cocktail shaker. Add the lemon juice, egg white, spirit and syrup and shake vigorously until frothy.","STEP 2","Add the ice, then shake again until the outside of the shaker feels cold. Double strain into martini glasses (see tip below).","STEP 3","Top up the martinis with the grape juice and garnish with the remaining passion fruit halves."]
'Citrus peach cooler', ["2 lemons , juice only","2 limes , juice only","1 lemon , thinly sliced","1 lime , thinly sliced","peach  nectar","cloudy  lemonade","a few sliced strawberry","sparkling water","mint sprigs"], ["STEP 1","Put the lemon juice and lime juice into a large jug. Add the sliced lemon and lime, and a handful of ice cubes. Add peach nectar to fill about one-third of the jug and top up to fill with lemonade.","STEP 2","Add the strawberries and top up with sparkling water and mint sprigs."]
'Ginger lemon fizz', ["50g fresh root ginger , roughly chopped","300g caster sugar","2 lemons , sliced, plus extra to serve","sparkling water"], ["STEP 1","Place the ginger, sugar and lemon slices in a pan with 150-200ml water. Bring to the boil, then cook until the sugar dissolves. Take off the heat, leave to cool, then press through a sieve.","STEP 2","To serve, pour into a pitcher and top up with sparkling water and extra lemon slices."]
'Really easy lemonade', ["3 unwaxed lemons, roughly chopped","140g caster sugar","1l cold water"], ["STEP 1","Tip the lemons, sugar and half the water into a food processor and blend until the lemon is finely chopped.","STEP 2","Pour the mixture into a sieve over a bowl, then press through as much juice as you can. Top up with the remaining water and serve with plain ice or frozen with slices of lemon and lime."]
'Mint & mango iced green tea', ["1 mango , peeled, stoned and chopped","100g granulated sugar","4 tsp green tea leaves","small bunch  fresh mint","1 lime , sliced","ice"], ["STEP 1","Put half the mango in a saucepan with the sugar and 100ml water. Cook for 8-10 mins then strain through a sieve and leave the liquid to cool.","STEP 2","Meanwhile, pour 500ml boiling water into a large heatproof jug and add the green tea leaves. Leave to steep for 5 mins, then strain into a large glass jug and add 300ml cold water. Leave to cool completely then put into the fridge to chill.","STEP 3","Once cold, add the strained mango syrup to the chilled tea, along with the rest of the chopped mango, fresh mint and the lime slices. Fill up the jug with ice, stir gently and serve."]
'Cheat’s ginger beer', ["100g ginger , scrubbed and roughly chopped","1 lemon , chopped","100g light muscovado sugar","1-litre bottle chilled  lemonade or sparkling water, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Put the ginger and lemon in a bowl, pour over 300ml water and blitz with a hand blender until very smooth. Strain through a sieve into a bowl, then press the pulp to remove as much liquid as you can. Add the sugar to the bowl and blitz again.","STEP 2","Decant into a bottle. Chill until ready to use. Add the lemonade or sparkling water to dilute before serving."]
'Apple, elderflower & mint sparkle', ["75ml elderflower cordial","1l cloudy  apple juice","small handful mint  leaves, roughly chopped","bottle sparkling water"], ["STEP 1","For a grown-up non-alcoholic drink, mix elderflower cordial with cloudy apple juice. Add a small handful mint leaves, stir well, then pour into a chilled flask.","STEP 2","At the picnic, pour half glasses of the juice and top up with sparkling water."]
'Hot apple pie punch', ["1 ½ tsp ground cinnamon","a good pinch ground cloves","½ whole grated nutmeg","2l apple juice","2 tsp vanilla extract","6 scoops vanilla ice cream","dark rum (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Put the cinnamon, ground cloves, nutmeg, apple juice and vanilla extract in a large saucepan. Bring to a gentle simmer.","STEP 2","When the apple juice has warmed through, add the vanilla ice cream and whisk vigorously with a balloon whisk until melted and combined with the hot apple juice – the ice cream should make a frothy top on the juice.","STEP 3","Pour a splash of dark rum into the bottom of the adults’ cups and top up with the hot punch. Garnish with Apple crisps."]
'Non-alcoholic tropical fizz', ["handful strawberries , hulled and halved","1 kiwi fruit , peeled and chopped","2 pineapple  rings, chopped","sparkling  apple juice","tropical fruit  juice","soda  water"], ["STEP 1","Fill 8 glasses with a mixture made up of strawberries, kiwi fruit and pineapple rings. Fill the glasses with equal amounts of chilled sparkling apple juice, chilled tropical fruit juice and chilled soda water. Serve immediately."]
'Sidecar mocktail', ["50ml cold lapsang souchong tea","50ml lemon juice","1 tsp marmalade","½ – 1 tsp honey","ice","slice dried orange (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Put a coupe glass in the fridge to chill. Put the cold tea, lemon juice and marmalade in\xa0a cocktail shaker and stir to\xa0break down the marmalade so it starts to dissolve. Stir in the honey then add the ice.","STEP 2","Shake well, until the outside of the shaker feels cold, then double strain\xa0into the chilled glass. Serve as it is or garnish with a slice of dried orange, if you like."]
'Pomegranate mojito mocktail', ["3 tbsp pomegranate seeds","big bunch mint","2 limes , quartered, plus slices to garnish","1l pomegranate juice","500ml lemonade"], ["STEP 1","A day ahead, divide the pomegranate seeds between the holes in an ice cube tray, top up with water and freeze.","STEP 2","Reserve half the mint for serving, and tear the rest into a large jug with the lime quarters. Using a rolling pin, bash the mint and lime to release the flavours. Add the pomegranate juice and lemonade. Put ice cubes in each glass, then strain over the pomegranate mix through a small sieve. Garnish with lime slices and more mint."]
'Homemade ginger beer', ["200g ginger , thickly sliced","2 large lemons , peeled and juiced","75g golden caster sugar","100g light brown muscovado sugar","ice","1 litre soda or sparkling water","mint sprigs, to serve"], ["STEP 1","Put the ginger in a saucepan\xa0set over a low heat with the lemon peel, sugars and 500ml water and stir until the sugars have dissolved. Increase the heat to medium,\xa0then simmer for 15-20 mins, or until reduced and syrupy. Remove from the heat and leave to cool completely.","STEP 2","Strain the syrup into a jug through a sieve lined with muslin. At this stage, you can transfer the syrup to a\xa0small sterilised bottle or jar and keep in the fridge for up to two weeks.","STEP 3","Pour the ginger syrup into a large serving jug. Tip in the lemon juice, fill with ice and top up with the soda water. Serve garnished with a few mint sprigs."]
'Raw raspberry shrub', ["300g raspberries","50g raw honey (see tip)","75ml raw apple cider vinegar (see tip)","½ small pack mint , leaves only","750ml bottle sparkling water","ice"], ["STEP 1","Put half the raspberries in a large bowl and lightly crush some of them with a muddler or a potato masher. Pour over the honey, stir well, cover and leave in the fridge overnight.","STEP 2","The following day, stir in the vinegar, then tip the mixture into a sieve over a large jug and press through using the back of a spoon.","STEP 3","Add the remaining raspberries, the mint leaves, sparkling water and ice. Stir gently to combine, then serve."]
'Summer cup mocktail', ["1cm thick slice of  cucumber","1 sprig  mint","few frozen red berries","120ml clear, sparkling lemonade","ice","more frozen berries , chopped fruits, cucumber slice, mint, citrus – all optional"], ["STEP 1","Chop the cucumber and mint sprig into small pieces. Bring 200ml water to the boil in a small pan and then add the mint and cucumber. Turn off the heat and leave for 2 mins. Add a small handful of frozen berries, let them defrost for a minute, then crush them lightly with the back of a spoon. Strain the mixture. This will keep in the fridge for up to 24 hours and will be enough to make four drinks.","STEP 2","Pour 40ml of your strained mixture into a tall glass. Add a handful of ice and top up with 120ml lemonade. Garnish with whatever chopped fruit you like or some more frozen berries and mint leaves if you have them. Stir gently to combine."]
'Mulled pomegranate juice', ["1l pomegranate juice","1 sprig rosemary","1 tsp sumac","1 cinnamon stick","½ tsp coriander seeds","½  orange , sliced","¼ tsp orange blossom water"], ["STEP 1","Pour the pomegranate juice into a large saucepan. Add the rosemary, sumac, cinnamon stick,\xa0coriander seeds, and orange. Bring to a simmer then pour through a sieve into a jug. Stir in the orange blossom water and pour into heatproof glasses or cups."]
'Pineapple & lime mocktail', ["1 tsp clear honey","edible gold glitter","small bunch coriander leaves","juice 1 lime","750ml pineapple juice","a handful of ice","400ml tonic water"], ["STEP 1","Dip a pastry brush in the honey and paint a line down one side of 4 tumblers. Sprinkle some edible gold glitter over the honey, dust off any excess, then put the glasses in the fridge.","STEP 2","Chop the coriander leaves and place in a cocktail shaker with the lime juice, 100ml pineapple juice and a handful of ice. Shake together until the outside of the shaker feels cold. Strain into the glasses, add extra ice cubes and divide 650ml pineapple juice and the tonic water between the glasses."]
'Pink lemonade', ["300g caster sugar","1½  lemons , sliced","1 orange , sliced","3 x 170g/6oz punnets raspberries","ice and fresh mint , to serve (optional)"], ["STEP 1","Place all the ingredients in a large saucepan and pour over 350ml cold water. Bring to the boil, stirring often, then leave to cool. Pour through a sieve, pressing down with a spoon to extract all the juices. The syrup can now be stored in the fridge for up to 1 week. To serve, pour a little into a glass and top up with sparkling or still water, ice and mint."]
'Mojito mocktail', ["1 tbsp sugar","small bunch mint","3 limes, juiced","soda water"], ["STEP 1","Muddle the sugar with leaves from the mint using a pestle and mortar (or use a small bowl and the end of a rolling pin).","STEP 2","Put a handful of crushed ice into 2 tall glasses. Divide the lime juice between the glasses with the mint mix. Add a straw and top up with soda water."]
'Homemade pink lemonade', ["8 lemons , plus extra slices to serve","200g caster sugar , plus extra to taste","140g raspberry , plus extra to serve","ice , to serve"], ["STEP 1","Pare the zest from the lemons with a peeler, removing as little white pith as possible – cut away any pith you can from the strips. Juice the lemons and mix the juice, zest, sugar and raspberries with 1.2 litres of boiling water. Let cool, then sieve, pressing through juice with the back of a spoon. Add sugar to taste and chill in jugs. To serve, add a few lemon slices, raspberries and lots of ice."]
'Virgin piña colada', ["150ml pineapple juice","50ml coconut milk","25ml lime juice","ice","cherry , to garnish","100g dark brown muscovado sugar","1 pineapple , a few strips of skin, plus leaves to garnish","5 black peppercorns","5 cloves","1 cinnamon stick"], ["STEP 1","To make a mock rum syrup, put the dark brown muscovado sugar and 200ml water in a saucepan, stir well and heat gently until the sugar has dissolved. Add a few strips of skin from the pineapple, add the\xa0black peppercorns, cloves and a\xa0cinnamon stick, then bring to the boil. Turn off the heat and leave to infuse until cold. Strain into a jug and set aside in the fridge until needed. Will keep for up to three days.","STEP 2","Pour the pineapple juice into a tall glass, and add the coconut milk and lime juice. Stir gently. Fill up the glass with a handful ice then slowly add 25ml of the syrup so it sinks to the bottom. Garnish with pineapple leaves and a tinned cherry."]
'Mulled apple juice', ["1l apple juice","strips of  orange peel","1 cinnamon stick , plus extra to garnish, if you like","3 cloves","sugar or honey, to taste"], ["STEP 1","Simmer the apple juice with the strips of orange peel, cinnamon stick and cloves for about 5-10 mins until all the flavours have infused. Sweeten to taste.","STEP 2","Serve each drink with a little orange peel and a piece of cinnamon stick, if you like."]
'Orange & cranberry spritz', ["500ml smooth orange juice","500ml smooth cranberry juice","400ml sparkling elderflower drink"], ["STEP 1","Mix together orange juice and cranberry juice in a large jug. Slowly pour in the sparkling elderflower drink, as it will fizz up. Mix together and serve in tall glasses with ice."]
'Zingy blackberry lemonade', ["2 lemons , cut into quarters, pips removed","150g punnet blackberries","few mint sprigs, leaves picked","50g icing sugar","fizzy water or prosecco , to serve"], ["STEP 1","Put the lemons, blackberries, mint leaves, sugar and 200ml water into a food processor. Blitz until everything is finely chopped and juicy. Strain through a fine sieve, bottle and chill until ready to drink. Will keep for up to a week. Top up with an equal measure of chilled fizzy water or Prosecco to serve."]
'Watermelon lemonade', ["1 large or 2 small watermelons","250ml lemon juice (from a bottle or squeeze your own)","100g golden caster sugar","1l bottle soda water","1 lime , cut into slices","small handful mint","crushed ice"], ["STEP 1","Cut the top off the watermelon and hollow it out using a large spoon, fishing out any pips along the way. Mash the flesh through a sieve into a bowl. Put the flesh in a blender (or use a tall jug and hand blender) with the lemon juice and sugar, whizz to a purée, then stir in the soda.","STEP 2","Heap some ice into the hollowed-out watermelon and fill it with the lemonade mixture. Serve the rest in a jug with the lime slices and mint. Have a bowl of extra crushed ice on the side so people can help themselves."]
'New York sour mocktail', ["1 tsp assam tea leaves (50ml tea)","few drops of  vanilla extract","25ml lemon juice","3 tsp maple syrup","1 tbsp egg white","ice","10ml pomegranate juice"], ["STEP 1","Pour 150ml boiling water over the tea leaves, stir, then strain straight away. You want a strong, but not stewed tea. Mix in the vanilla extract and leave to cool.","STEP 2","Pour the lemon juice, maple syrup and 50ml of the tea into a cocktail shaker. Stir the egg white with a fork to loosen it, then add 1 tbsp to the shaker. Shake well until the mixture is frothy. Add a good handful of ice and shake again.","STEP 3","Double strain into a glass filled with ice. Top up the pomegranate juice with water to make 20ml, then slowly pour\xa0into the glass.\xa0Let it settle for a moment –\xa0the juice will float just underneath the egg white foam."]
'Blackcurrant cordial', ["300g golden caster sugar","zest and juice 2 lemons","450g blackcurrants"], ["STEP 1","Put the sugar in a large saucepan with 300ml water. Bring to a simmer then add the lemon zest and juice followed by the blackcurrants.\xa0Cook the mixture over a medium heat until the blackcurrants start to soften and burst.","STEP 2","Pour the mixture through a sieve lined with muslin into a clean, heatproof jug then transfer to sterilised bottles. Keeps in the fridge for up to 1 month.","STEP 3","Serve approx. 25ml of cordial per 100ml sparkling or still water, or dilute to taste."]
'Raspberry lemonade slushies', ["600g frozen raspberries","juice 3 lemons","225ml soda water","9 ice cubes (roughly 170g)","3 tbsp agave nectar"], ["STEP 1","Put all the ingredients in a blender or food processor and blitz until you get a smooth slush. Divide between six jars or cups to serve."]
'Faux fizz', ["2 tsp apple cider vinegar","sparkling water , to top up","1 sliced pear","4 dried apricots","75g golden caster sugar","25g honey","1 sprig  rosemary , plus extra to garnish (optional)","1 strip lemon zest"], ["STEP 1","To make the base syrup, put the\xa0sliced pear, dried apricots, golden caster sugar, honey, sprig of rosemary and a strip of lemon zest in a saucepan with 100ml water. Heat for 10 mins or until the sugar has dissolved and the pear is very soft, then leave to cool completely.","STEP 2","Strain the syrup into a jug, add the apple cider vinegar and chill in the fridge for at least 30 mins. Pour about 25ml of the syrup into a champagne flute and top with cold sparkling water. Garnish with a rosemary sprig, if you like."]
'Melon spritzers', ["500g/1lb 2oz honeydew, Galia or cantaloupe  melon chunks (or a mixture), plus some melon balls to serve (optional)","zest and juice 2  limes","100ml/ 3 ½fl oz cloudy  apple juice","200-250ml/7-9fl oz chilled white wine","chilled  lemonade , crushed ice and a few bamboo skewers (optional), to serve"], ["STEP 1","Put the melon chunks in a blender or food processor with the lime juice and apple juice. Whizz to the smoothest you can get, then stir in the lime zest. Cover and chill until ready to serve.","STEP 2","To serve, pour the melon mixture into a big jug with the wine, then add an equal part of lemonade and give it a good stir. Thread a few melon balls onto skewers, if you like, add one to each glass with some crushed ice, and top up with the melon spritzer."]
