<article name="Nineteen eighty-four">
Title:      Nineteen eighty-four
Author:     George Orwell (pseudonym of Eric Blair) (1903-1950)




PART ONE



Chapter 1



It was a bright cold day in April, and the clocks were striking thirteen.
Winston Smith, his chin nuzzled into his breast in an effort to escape the
vile wind, slipped quickly through the glass doors of Victory Mansions,
though not quickly enough to prevent a swirl of gritty dust from entering
along with him.

The hallway smelt of boiled cabbage and old rag mats. At one end of it a
coloured poster, too large for indoor display, had been tacked to the wall.
It depicted simply an enormous face, more than a metre wide: the face of a
man of about forty-five, with a heavy black moustache and ruggedly handsome
features. Winston made for the stairs. It was no use trying the lift. Even
at the best of times it was seldom working, and at present the electric
current was cut off during daylight hours. It was part of the economy drive
in preparation for Hate Week. The flat was seven flights up, and Winston,
who was thirty-nine and had a varicose ulcer above his right ankle, went
slowly, resting several times on the way. On each landing, opposite the
lift-shaft, the poster with the enormous face gazed from the wall. It was
one of those pictures which are so contrived that the eyes follow you about
when you move. BIG BROTHER IS WATCHING YOU, the caption beneath it ran.

Inside the flat a fruity voice was reading out a list of figures which had
something to do with the production of pig-iron. The voice came from an
oblong metal plaque like a dulled mirror which formed part of the surface
of the right-hand wall. Winston turned a switch and the voice sank
somewhat, though the words were still distinguishable. The instrument
(the telescreen, it was called) could be dimmed, but there was no way of
shutting it off completely. He moved over to the window: a smallish, frail
figure, the meagreness of his body merely emphasized by the blue overalls
which were the uniform of the party. His hair was very fair, his face
naturally sanguine, his skin roughened by coarse soap and blunt razor
blades and the cold of the winter that had just ended.

Outside, even through the shut window-pane, the world looked cold. Down in
the street little eddies of wind were whirling dust and torn paper into
spirals, and though the sun was shining and the sky a harsh blue, there
seemed to be no colour in anything, except the posters that were plastered
everywhere. The black-moustachio'd face gazed down from every commanding
corner. There was one on the house-front immediately opposite. BIG BROTHER
IS WATCHING YOU, the caption said, while the dark eyes looked deep into
Winston's own. Down at street level another poster, torn at one corner,
flapped fitfully in the wind, alternately covering and uncovering the
single word INGSOC. In the far distance a helicopter skimmed down between
the roofs, hovered for an instant like a bluebottle, and darted away again
with a curving flight. It was the police patrol, snooping into people's
windows. The patrols did not matter, however. Only the Thought Police
mattered.

Behind Winston's back the voice from the telescreen was still babbling away
about pig-iron and the overfulfilment of the Ninth Three-Year Plan. The
telescreen received and transmitted simultaneously. Any sound that Winston
made, above the level of a very low whisper, would be picked up by it,
moreover, so long as he remained within the field of vision which the metal
plaque commanded, he could be seen as well as heard. There was of course
no way of knowing whether you were being watched at any given moment. How
often, or on what system, the Thought Police plugged in on any individual
wire was guesswork. It was even conceivable that they watched everybody all
the time. But at any rate they could plug in your wire whenever they wanted
to. You had to live--did live, from habit that became instinct--in the
assumption that every sound you made was overheard, and, except in
darkness, every movement scrutinized.

Winston kept his back turned to the telescreen. It was safer; though, as he
well knew, even a back can be revealing. A kilometre away the Ministry of
Truth, his place of work, towered vast and white above the grimy landscape.
This, he thought with a sort of vague distaste--this was London, chief
city of Airstrip One, itself the third most populous of the provinces of
Oceania. He tried to squeeze out some childhood memory that should tell him
whether London had always been quite like this. Were there always these
vistas of rotting nineteenth-century houses, their sides shored up with
baulks of timber, their windows patched with cardboard and their roofs
with corrugated iron, their crazy garden walls sagging in all directions?
And the bombed sites where the plaster dust swirled in the air and the
willow-herb straggled over the heaps of rubble; and the places where the
bombs had cleared a larger patch and there had sprung up sordid colonies
of wooden dwellings like chicken-houses? But it was no use, he could not
remember: nothing remained of his childhood except a series of bright-lit
tableaux occurring against no background and mostly unintelligible.

The Ministry of Truth--Minitrue, in Newspeak [Newspeak was the official
language of Oceania. For an account of its structure and etymology see
Appendix.]--was startlingly different from any other object in sight. It
was an enormous pyramidal structure of glittering white concrete, soaring
up, terrace after terrace, 300 metres into the air. From where Winston
stood it was just possible to read, picked out on its white face in
elegant lettering, the three slogans of the Party:


  WAR IS PEACE
  FREEDOM IS SLAVERY
  IGNORANCE IS STRENGTH


The Ministry of Truth contained, it was said, three thousand rooms above
ground level, and corresponding ramifications below. Scattered about London
there were just three other buildings of similar appearance and size. So
completely did they dwarf the surrounding architecture that from the roof
of Victory Mansions you could see all four of them simultaneously. They
were the homes of the four Ministries between which the entire apparatus
of government was divided. The Ministry of Truth, which concerned itself
with news, entertainment, education, and the fine arts. The Ministry of
Peace, which concerned itself with war. The Ministry of Love, which
maintained law and order. And the Ministry of Plenty, which was responsible
for economic affairs. Their names, in Newspeak: Minitrue, Minipax, Miniluv,
and Miniplenty.

The Ministry of Love was the really frightening one. There were no windows
in it at all. Winston had never been inside the Ministry of Love, nor
within half a kilometre of it. It was a place impossible to enter except
on official business, and then only by penetrating through a maze of
barbed-wire entanglements, steel doors, and hidden machine-gun nests. Even
the streets leading up to its outer barriers were roamed by gorilla-faced
guards in black uniforms, armed with jointed truncheons.

Winston turned round abruptly. He had set his features into the
expression of quiet optimism which it was advisable to wear when facing
the telescreen. He crossed the room into the tiny kitchen. By leaving
the Ministry at this time of day he had sacrificed his lunch in the
canteen, and he was aware that there was no food in the kitchen except
a hunk of dark-coloured bread which had got to be saved for tomorrow's
breakfast. He took down from the shelf a bottle of colourless liquid
with a plain white label marked VICTORY GIN. It gave off a sickly, oily
smell, as of Chinese rice-spirit. Winston poured out nearly a teacupful,
nerved himself for a shock, and gulped it down like a dose of medicine.

Instantly his face turned scarlet and the water ran out of his eyes. The
stuff was like nitric acid, and moreover, in swallowing it one had the
sensation of being hit on the back of the head with a rubber club. The
next moment, however, the burning in his belly died down and the world
began to look more cheerful. He took a cigarette from a crumpled packet
marked VICTORY CIGARETTES and incautiously held it upright, whereupon the
tobacco fell out on to the floor. With the next he was more successful.
He went back to the living-room and sat down at a small table that stood
to the left of the telescreen. From the table drawer he took out a
penholder, a bottle of ink, and a thick, quarto-sized blank book with a
red back and a marbled cover.

For some reason the telescreen in the living-room was in an unusual
position. Instead of being placed, as was normal, in the end wall, where
it could command the whole room, it was in the longer wall, opposite the
window. To one side of it there was a shallow alcove in which Winston
was now sitting, and which, when the flats were built, had probably been
intended to hold bookshelves. By sitting in the alcove, and keeping well
back, Winston was able to remain outside the range of the telescreen, so
far as sight went. He could be heard, of course, but so long as he stayed
in his present position he could not be seen. It was partly the unusual
geography of the room that had suggested to him the thing that he was now
about to do.

But it had also been suggested by the book that he had just taken out of
the drawer. It was a peculiarly beautiful book. Its smooth creamy paper,
a little yellowed by age, was of a kind that had not been manufactured for
at least forty years past. He could guess, however, that the book was much
older than that. He had seen it lying in the window of a frowsy little
junk-shop in a slummy quarter of the town (just what quarter he did not
now remember) and had been stricken immediately by an overwhelming desire
to possess it. Party members were supposed not to go into ordinary shops
('dealing on the free market', it was called), but the rule was not
strictly kept, because there were various things, such as shoelaces and
razor blades, which it was impossible to get hold of in any other way. He
had given a quick glance up and down the street and then had slipped inside
and bought the book for two dollars fifty. At the time he was not conscious
of wanting it for any particular purpose. He had carried it guiltily home
in his briefcase. Even with nothing written in it, it was a compromising
possession.

The thing that he was about to do was to open a diary. This was not illegal
(nothing was illegal, since there were no longer any laws), but if detected
it was reasonably certain that it would be punished by death, or at least
by twenty-five years in a forced-labour camp. Winston fitted a nib into
the penholder and sucked it to get the grease off. The pen was an archaic
instrument, seldom used even for signatures, and he had procured one,
furtively and with some difficulty, simply because of a feeling that the
beautiful creamy paper deserved to be written on with a real nib instead
of being scratched with an ink-pencil. Actually he was not used to writing
by hand. Apart from very short notes, it was usual to dictate everything
into the speak-write which was of course impossible for his present
purpose. He dipped the pen into the ink and then faltered for just a
second. A tremor had gone through his bowels. To mark the paper was the
decisive act. In small clumsy letters he wrote:


   April 4th, 1984.


He sat back. A sense of complete helplessness had descended upon him. To
begin with, he did not know with any certainty that this was 1984. It
must be round about that date, since he was fairly sure that his age was
thirty-nine, and he believed that he had been born in 1944 or 1945; but
it was never possible nowadays to pin down any date within a year or two.

For whom, it suddenly occurred to him to wonder, was he writing this diary?
For the future, for the unborn. His mind hovered for a moment round the
doubtful date on the page, and then fetched up with a bump against the
Newspeak word DOUBLETHINK. For the first time the magnitude of what he had
undertaken came home to him. How could you communicate with the future? It
was of its nature impossible. Either the future would resemble the present,
in which case it would not listen to him: or it would be different from it,
and his predicament would be meaningless.

For some time he sat gazing stupidly at the paper. The telescreen had
changed over to strident military music. It was curious that he seemed
not merely to have lost the power of expressing himself, but even to have
forgotten what it was that he had originally intended to say. For weeks
past he had been making ready for this moment, and it had never crossed
his mind that anything would be needed except courage. The actual writing
would be easy. All he had to do was to transfer to paper the interminable
restless monologue that had been running inside his head, literally for
years. At this moment, however, even the monologue had dried up. Moreover
his varicose ulcer had begun itching unbearably. He dared not scratch it,
because if he did so it always became inflamed. The seconds were ticking
by. He was conscious of nothing except the blankness of the page in front
of him, the itching of the skin above his ankle, the blaring of the music,
and a slight booziness caused by the gin.

Suddenly he began writing in sheer panic, only imperfectly aware of what
he was setting down. His small but childish handwriting straggled up and
down the page, shedding first its capital letters and finally even its
full stops:


   April 4th, 1984. Last night to the flicks. All war films. One very good
one of a ship full of refugees being bombed somewhere in the Mediterranean.
Audience much amused by shots of a great huge fat man trying to swim away
with a helicopter after him, first you saw him wallowing along in the
water like a porpoise, then you saw him through the helicopters gunsights,
then he was full of holes and the sea round him turned pink and he sank as
suddenly as though the holes had let in the water, audience shouting with
laughter when he sank. then you saw a lifeboat full of children with a
helicopter hovering over it. there was a middle-aged woman might have been
a jewess sitting up in the bow with a little boy about three years old in
her arms. little boy screaming with fright and hiding his head between her
breasts as if he was trying to burrow right into her and the woman putting
her arms round him and comforting him although she was blue with fright
herself, all the time covering him up as much as possible as if she thought
her arms could keep the bullets off him. then the helicopter planted a 20
kilo bomb in among them terrific flash and the boat went all to matchwood.
then there was a wonderful shot of a child's arm going up up up right up
into the air a helicopter with a camera in its nose must have followed it
up and there was a lot of applause from the party seats but a woman down in
the prole part of the house suddenly started kicking up a fuss and shouting
they didnt oughter of showed it not in front of kids they didnt it aint
right not in front of kids it aint until the police turned her turned her
out i dont suppose anything happened to her nobody cares what the proles
say typical prole reaction they never----


Winston stopped writing, partly because he was suffering from cramp. He did
not know what had made him pour out this stream of rubbish. But the curious
thing was that while he was doing so a totally different memory had
clarified itself in his mind, to the point where he almost felt equal to
writing it down. It was, he now realized, because of this other incident
that he had suddenly decided to come home and begin the diary today.

It had happened that morning at the Ministry, if anything so nebulous could
be said to happen.

It was nearly eleven hundred, and in the Records Department, where Winston
worked, they were dragging the chairs out of the cubicles and grouping them
in the centre of the hall opposite the big telescreen, in preparation for
the Two Minutes Hate. Winston was just taking his place in one of the
middle rows when two people whom he knew by sight, but had never spoken
to, came unexpectedly into the room. One of them was a girl whom he often
passed in the corridors. He did not know her name, but he knew that she
worked in the Fiction Department. Presumably--since he had sometimes seen
her with oily hands and carrying a spanner--she had some mechanical job
on one of the novel-writing machines. She was a bold-looking girl, of
about twenty-seven, with thick hair, a freckled face, and swift, athletic
movements. A narrow scarlet sash, emblem of the Junior Anti-Sex League, was
wound several times round the waist of her overalls, just tightly enough to
bring out the shapeliness of her hips. Winston had disliked her from the
very first moment of seeing her. He knew the reason. It was because of the
atmosphere of hockey-fields and cold baths and community hikes and general
clean-mindedness which she managed to carry about with her. He disliked
nearly all women, and especially the young and pretty ones. It was always
the women, and above all the young ones, who were the most bigoted
adherents of the Party, the swallowers of slogans, the amateur spies and
nosers-out of unorthodoxy. But this particular girl gave him the impression
of being more dangerous than most. Once when they passed in the corridor
she gave him a quick sidelong glance which seemed to pierce right into
him and for a moment had filled him with black terror. The idea had even
crossed his mind that she might be an agent of the Thought Police. That,
it was true, was very unlikely. Still, he continued to feel a peculiar
uneasiness, which had fear mixed up in it as well as hostility, whenever
she was anywhere near him.

The other person was a man named O'Brien, a member of the Inner Party and
holder of some post so important and remote that Winston had only a dim
idea of its nature. A momentary hush passed over the group of people
round the chairs as they saw the black overalls of an Inner Party member
approaching. O'Brien was a large, burly man with a thick neck and a coarse,
humorous, brutal face. In spite of his formidable appearance he had a
certain charm of manner. He had a trick of resettling his spectacles on
his nose which was curiously disarming--in some indefinable way, curiously
civilized. It was a gesture which, if anyone had still thought in such
terms, might have recalled an eighteenth-century nobleman offering his
snuffbox. Winston had seen O'Brien perhaps a dozen times in almost as many
years. He felt deeply drawn to him, and not solely because he was intrigued
by the contrast between O'Brien's urbane manner and his prize-fighter's
physique. Much more it was because of a secretly held belief--or perhaps
not even a belief, merely a hope--that O'Brien's political orthodoxy was
not perfect. Something in his face suggested it irresistibly. And again,
perhaps it was not even unorthodoxy that was written in his face, but
simply intelligence. But at any rate he had the appearance of being a
person that you could talk to if somehow you could cheat the telescreen and
get him alone. Winston had never made the smallest effort to verify this
guess: indeed, there was no way of doing so. At this moment O'Brien glanced
at his wrist-watch, saw that it was nearly eleven hundred, and evidently
decided to stay in the Records Department until the Two Minutes Hate was
over. He took a chair in the same row as Winston, a couple of places away.
A small, sandy-haired woman who worked in the next cubicle to Winston was
between them. The girl with dark hair was sitting immediately behind.

The next moment a hideous, grinding speech, as of some monstrous machine
running without oil, burst from the big telescreen at the end of the room.
It was a noise that set one's teeth on edge and bristled the hair at the
back of one's neck. The Hate had started.

As usual, the face of Emmanuel Goldstein, the Enemy of the People, had
flashed on to the screen. There were hisses here and there among the
audience. The little sandy-haired woman gave a squeak of mingled fear and
disgust. Goldstein was the renegade and backslider who once, long ago
(how long ago, nobody quite remembered), had been one of the leading
figures of the Party, almost on a level with Big Brother himself, and
then had engaged in counter-revolutionary activities, had been condemned
to death, and had mysteriously escaped and disappeared. The programmes
of the Two Minutes Hate varied from day to day, but there was none in
which Goldstein was not the principal figure. He was the primal traitor,
the earliest defiler of the Party's purity. All subsequent crimes against
the Party, all treacheries, acts of sabotage, heresies, deviations,
sprang directly out of his teaching. Somewhere or other he was still
alive and hatching his conspiracies: perhaps somewhere beyond the sea,
under the protection of his foreign paymasters, perhaps even--so it was
occasionally rumoured--in some hiding-place in Oceania itself.

Winston's diaphragm was constricted. He could never see the face of
Goldstein without a painful mixture of emotions. It was a lean Jewish face,
with a great fuzzy aureole of white hair and a small goatee beard--a
clever face, and yet somehow inherently despicable, with a kind of senile
silliness in the long thin nose, near the end of which a pair of spectacles
was perched. It resembled the face of a sheep, and the voice, too, had a
sheep-like quality. Goldstein was delivering his usual venomous attack
upon the doctrines of the Party--an attack so exaggerated and perverse that
a child should have been able to see through it, and yet just plausible
enough to fill one with an alarmed feeling that other people, less
level-headed than oneself, might be taken in by it. He was abusing Big
Brother, he was denouncing the dictatorship of the Party, he was demanding
the immediate conclusion of peace with Eurasia, he was advocating freedom
of speech, freedom of the Press, freedom of assembly, freedom of thought,
he was crying hysterically that the revolution had been betrayed--and all
this in rapid polysyllabic speech which was a sort of parody of the
habitual style of the orators of the Party, and even contained Newspeak
words: more Newspeak words, indeed, than any Party member would normally
use in real life. And all the while, lest one should be in any doubt as to
the reality which Goldstein's specious claptrap covered, behind his head on
the telescreen there marched the endless columns of the Eurasian army--row
after row of solid-looking men with expressionless Asiatic faces, who swam
up to the surface of the screen and vanished, to be replaced by others
exactly similar. The dull rhythmic tramp of the soldiers' boots formed the
background to Goldstein's bleating voice.

Before the Hate had proceeded for thirty seconds, uncontrollable
exclamations of rage were breaking out from half the people in the room.
The self-satisfied sheep-like face on the screen, and the terrifying power
of the Eurasian army behind it, were too much to be borne: besides,
the sight or even the thought of Goldstein produced fear and anger
automatically. He was an object of hatred more constant than either Eurasia
or Eastasia, since when Oceania was at war with one of these Powers it was
generally at peace with the other. But what was strange was that although
Goldstein was hated and despised by everybody, although every day and a
thousand times a day, on platforms, on the telescreen, in newspapers,
in books, his theories were refuted, smashed, ridiculed, held up to the
general gaze for the pitiful rubbish that they were--in spite of all this,
his influence never seemed to grow less. Always there were fresh dupes
waiting to be seduced by him. A day never passed when spies and saboteurs
acting under his directions were not unmasked by the Thought Police.
He was the commander of a vast shadowy army, an underground network of
conspirators dedicated to the overthrow of the State. The Brotherhood, its
name was supposed to be. There were also whispered stories of a terrible
book, a compendium of all the heresies, of which Goldstein was the author
and which circulated clandestinely here and there. It was a book without a
title. People referred to it, if at all, simply as THE BOOK. But one knew
of such things only through vague rumours. Neither the Brotherhood nor
THE BOOK was a subject that any ordinary Party member would mention if
there was a way of avoiding it.

In its second minute the Hate rose to a frenzy. People were leaping up and
down in their places and shouting at the tops of their voices in an effort
to drown the maddening bleating voice that came from the screen. The little
sandy-haired woman had turned bright pink, and her mouth was opening and
shutting like that of a landed fish. Even O'Brien's heavy face was flushed.
He was sitting very straight in his chair, his powerful chest swelling and
quivering as though he were standing up to the assault of a wave. The
dark-haired girl behind Winston had begun crying out 'Swine! Swine! Swine!'
and suddenly she picked up a heavy Newspeak dictionary and flung it at the
screen. It struck Goldstein's nose and bounced off; the voice continued
inexorably. In a lucid moment Winston found that he was shouting with the
others and kicking his heel violently against the rung of his chair. The
horrible thing about the Two Minutes Hate was not that one was obliged to
act a part, but, on the contrary, that it was impossible to avoid joining
in. Within thirty seconds any pretence was always unnecessary. A hideous
ecstasy of fear and vindictiveness, a desire to kill, to torture, to smash
faces in with a sledge-hammer, seemed to flow through the whole group of
people like an electric current, turning one even against one's will into
a grimacing, screaming lunatic. And yet the rage that one felt was an
abstract, undirected emotion which could be switched from one object to
another like the flame of a blowlamp. Thus, at one moment Winston's hatred
was not turned against Goldstein at all, but, on the contrary, against
Big Brother, the Party, and the Thought Police; and at such moments his
heart went out to the lonely, derided heretic on the screen, sole guardian
of truth and sanity in a world of lies. And yet the very next instant he
was at one with the people about him, and all that was said of Goldstein
seemed to him to be true. At those moments his secret loathing of Big
Brother changed into adoration, and Big Brother seemed to tower up, an
invincible, fearless protector, standing like a rock against the hordes
of Asia, and Goldstein, in spite of his isolation, his helplessness, and
the doubt that hung about his very existence, seemed like some sinister
enchanter, capable by the mere power of his voice of wrecking the structure
of civilization.

It was even possible, at moments, to switch one's hatred this way or that
by a voluntary act. Suddenly, by the sort of violent effort with which one
wrenches one's head away from the pillow in a nightmare, Winston succeeded
in transferring his hatred from the face on the screen to the dark-haired
girl behind him. Vivid, beautiful hallucinations flashed through his mind.
He would flog her to death with a rubber truncheon. He would tie her naked
to a stake and shoot her full of arrows like Saint Sebastian. He would
ravish her and cut her throat at the moment of climax. Better than before,
moreover, he realized WHY it was that he hated her. He hated her because
she was young and pretty and sexless, because he wanted to go to bed with
her and would never do so, because round her sweet supple waist, which
seemed to ask you to encircle it with your arm, there was only the odious
scarlet sash, aggressive symbol of chastity.

The Hate rose to its climax. The voice of Goldstein had become an actual
sheep's bleat, and for an instant the face changed into that of a sheep.
Then the sheep-face melted into the figure of a Eurasian soldier who seemed
to be advancing, huge and terrible, his sub-machine gun roaring, and
seeming to spring out of the surface of the screen, so that some of the
people in the front row actually flinched backwards in their seats. But
in the same moment, drawing a deep sigh of relief from everybody, the
hostile figure melted into the face of Big Brother, black-haired,
black-moustachio'd, full of power and mysterious calm, and so vast that
it almost filled up the screen. Nobody heard what Big Brother was saying.
It was merely a few words of encouragement, the sort of words that are
uttered in the din of battle, not distinguishable individually but
restoring confidence by the fact of being spoken. Then the face of Big
Brother faded away again, and instead the three slogans of the Party stood
out in bold capitals:


  WAR IS PEACE
  FREEDOM IS SLAVERY
  IGNORANCE IS STRENGTH


But the face of Big Brother seemed to persist for several seconds on the
screen, as though the impact that it had made on everyone's eyeballs was
too vivid to wear off immediately. The little sandy-haired woman had flung
herself forward over the back of the chair in front of her. With a
tremulous murmur that sounded like 'My Saviour!' she extended her arms
towards the screen. Then she buried her face in her hands. It was apparent
that she was uttering a prayer.

At this moment the entire group of people broke into a deep, slow,
rhythmical chant of 'B-B!...B-B!'--over and over again, very slowly, with a
long pause between the first 'B' and the second--a heavy, murmurous sound,
somehow curiously savage, in the background of which one seemed to hear the
stamp of naked feet and the throbbing of tom-toms. For perhaps as much as
thirty seconds they kept it up. It was a refrain that was often heard in
moments of overwhelming emotion. Partly it was a sort of hymn to the wisdom
and majesty of Big Brother, but still more it was an act of self-hypnosis,
a deliberate drowning of consciousness by means of rhythmic noise.
Winston's entrails seemed to grow cold. In the Two Minutes Hate he could
not help sharing in the general delirium, but this sub-human chanting of
'B-B!...B-B!' always filled him with horror. Of course he chanted with the
rest: it was impossible to do otherwise. To dissemble your feelings, to
control your face, to do what everyone else was doing, was an instinctive
reaction. But there was a space of a couple of seconds during which the
expression of his eyes might conceivably have betrayed him. And it was
exactly at this moment that the significant thing happened--if, indeed,
it did happen.

Momentarily he caught O'Brien's eye. O'Brien had stood up. He had taken
off his spectacles and was in the act of resettling them on his nose with
his characteristic gesture. But there was a fraction of a second when
their eyes met, and for as long as it took to happen Winston knew--yes, he
KNEW!--that O'Brien was thinking the same thing as himself. An unmistakable
message had passed. It was as though their two minds had opened and the
thoughts were flowing from one into the other through their eyes. 'I am
with you,' O'Brien seemed to be saying to him. 'I know precisely what you
are feeling. I know all about your contempt, your hatred, your disgust.
But don't worry, I am on your side!' And then the flash of intelligence
was gone, and O'Brien's face was as inscrutable as everybody else's.

That was all, and he was already uncertain whether it had happened. Such
incidents never had any sequel. All that they did was to keep alive in him
the belief, or hope, that others besides himself were the enemies of the
Party. Perhaps the rumours of vast underground conspiracies were true after
all--perhaps the Brotherhood really existed! It was impossible, in spite
of the endless arrests and confessions and executions, to be sure that the
Brotherhood was not simply a myth. Some days he believed in it, some days
not. There was no evidence, only fleeting glimpses that might mean anything
or nothing: snatches of overheard conversation, faint scribbles on lavatory
walls--once, even, when two strangers met, a small movement of the hand
which had looked as though it might be a signal of recognition. It was all
guesswork: very likely he had imagined everything. He had gone back to his
cubicle without looking at O'Brien again. The idea of following up their
momentary contact hardly crossed his mind. It would have been inconceivably
dangerous even if he had known how to set about doing it. For a second, two
seconds, they had exchanged an equivocal glance, and that was the end of
the story. But even that was a memorable event, in the locked loneliness in
which one had to live.

Winston roused himself and sat up straighter. He let out a belch. The gin
was rising from his stomach.

His eyes re-focused on the page. He discovered that while he sat helplessly
musing he had also been writing, as though by automatic action. And it was
no longer the same cramped, awkward handwriting as before. His pen had slid
voluptuously over the smooth paper, printing in large neat capitals--


  DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER
  DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER
  DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER
  DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER
  DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER


over and over again, filling half a page.

He could not help feeling a twinge of panic. It was absurd, since the
writing of those particular words was not more dangerous than the initial
act of opening the diary, but for a moment he was tempted to tear out the
spoiled pages and abandon the enterprise altogether.

He did not do so, however, because he knew that it was useless. Whether he
wrote DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER, or whether he refrained from writing it, made
no difference. Whether he went on with the diary, or whether he did not go
on with it, made no difference. The Thought Police would get him just the
same. He had committed--would still have committed, even if he had never
set pen to paper--the essential crime that contained all others in itself.
Thoughtcrime, they called it. Thoughtcrime was not a thing that could be
concealed for ever. You might dodge successfully for a while, even for
years, but sooner or later they were bound to get you.

It was always at night--the arrests invariably happened at night. The
sudden jerk out of sleep, the rough hand shaking your shoulder, the lights
glaring in your eyes, the ring of hard faces round the bed. In the vast
majority of cases there was no trial, no report of the arrest. People
simply disappeared, always during the night. Your name was removed from the
registers, every record of everything you had ever done was wiped out, your
one-time existence was denied and then forgotten. You were abolished,
annihilated: VAPORIZED was the usual word.

For a moment he was seized by a kind of hysteria. He began writing in a
hurried untidy scrawl:


   theyll shoot me i don't care theyll shoot me in the back of the neck i
dont care down with big brother they always shoot you in the back of the
neck i dont care down with big brother----


He sat back in his chair, slightly ashamed of himself, and laid down
the pen. The next moment he started violently. There was a knocking at
the door.

Already! He sat as still as a mouse, in the futile hope that whoever it was
might go away after a single attempt. But no, the knocking was repeated.
The worst thing of all would be to delay. His heart was thumping like a
drum, but his face, from long habit, was probably expressionless. He got
up and moved heavily towards the door.




Chapter 2



As he put his hand to the door-knob Winston saw that he had left the
diary open on the table. DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER was written all over it,
in letters almost big enough to be legible across the room. It was an
inconceivably stupid thing to have done. But, he realized, even in his
panic he had not wanted to smudge the creamy paper by shutting the book
while the ink was wet.

He drew in his breath and opened the door. Instantly a warm wave of relief
flowed through him. A colourless, crushed-looking woman, with wispy hair
and a lined face, was standing outside.

'Oh, comrade,' she began in a dreary, whining sort of voice, 'I thought I
heard you come in. Do you think you could come across and have a look at
our kitchen sink? It's got blocked up and----'

It was Mrs Parsons, the wife of a neighbour on the same floor. ('Mrs' was
a word somewhat discountenanced by the Party--you were supposed to call
everyone 'comrade'--but with some women one used it instinctively.) She was
a woman of about thirty, but looking much older. One had the impression
that there was dust in the creases of her face. Winston followed her down
the passage. These amateur repair jobs were an almost daily irritation.
Victory Mansions were old flats, built in 1930 or thereabouts, and were
falling to pieces. The plaster flaked constantly from ceilings and walls,
the pipes burst in every hard frost, the roof leaked whenever there was
snow, the heating system was usually running at half steam when it was not
closed down altogether from motives of economy. Repairs, except what you
could do for yourself, had to be sanctioned by remote committees which
were liable to hold up even the mending of a window-pane for two years.

'Of course it's only because Tom isn't home,' said Mrs Parsons vaguely.

The Parsons' flat was bigger than Winston's, and dingy in a different
way. Everything had a battered, trampled-on look, as though the
place had just been visited by some large violent animal. Games
impedimenta--hockey-sticks, boxing-gloves, a burst football, a pair of
sweaty shorts turned inside out--lay all over the floor, and on the
table there was a litter of dirty dishes and dog-eared exercise-books.
On the walls were scarlet banners of the Youth League and the Spies, and
a full-sized poster of Big Brother. There was the usual boiled-cabbage
smell, common to the whole building, but it was shot through by a sharper
reek of sweat, which--one knew this at the first sniff, though it was
hard to say how--was the sweat of some person not present at the moment.
In another room someone with a comb and a piece of toilet paper was
trying to keep tune with the military music which was still issuing
from the telescreen.

'It's the children,' said Mrs Parsons, casting a half-apprehensive glance
at the door. 'They haven't been out today. And of course----'

She had a habit of breaking off her sentences in the middle. The kitchen
sink was full nearly to the brim with filthy greenish water which smelt
worse than ever of cabbage. Winston knelt down and examined the angle-joint
of the pipe. He hated using his hands, and he hated bending down, which was
always liable to start him coughing. Mrs Parsons looked on helplessly.

'Of course if Tom was home he'd put it right in a moment,' she said.
'He loves anything like that. He's ever so good with his hands, Tom is.'

Parsons was Winston's fellow-employee at the Ministry of Truth. He was
a fattish but active man of paralysing stupidity, a mass of imbecile
enthusiasms--one of those completely unquestioning, devoted drudges on
whom, more even than on the Thought Police, the stability of the Party
depended. At thirty-five he had just been unwillingly evicted from the
Youth League, and before graduating into the Youth League he had managed to
stay on in the Spies for a year beyond the statutory age. At the Ministry
he was employed in some subordinate post for which intelligence was not
required, but on the other hand he was a leading figure on the Sports
Committee and all the other committees engaged in organizing community
hikes, spontaneous demonstrations, savings campaigns, and voluntary
activities generally. He would inform you with quiet pride, between whiffs
of his pipe, that he had put in an appearance at the Community Centre every
evening for the past four years. An overpowering smell of sweat, a sort of
unconscious testimony to the strenuousness of his life, followed him about
wherever he went, and even remained behind him after he had gone.

'Have you got a spanner?' said Winston, fiddling with the nut on the
angle-joint.

'A spanner,' said Mrs Parsons, immediately becoming invertebrate. 'I don't
know, I'm sure. Perhaps the children----'

There was a trampling of boots and another blast on the comb as the
children charged into the living-room. Mrs Parsons brought the spanner.
Winston let out the water and disgustedly removed the clot of human hair
that had blocked up the pipe. He cleaned his fingers as best he could in
the cold water from the tap and went back into the other room.

'Up with your hands!' yelled a savage voice.

A handsome, tough-looking boy of nine had popped up from behind the table
and was menacing him with a toy automatic pistol, while his small sister,
about two years younger, made the same gesture with a fragment of wood.
Both of them were dressed in the blue shorts, grey shirts, and red
neckerchiefs which were the uniform of the Spies. Winston raised his hands
above his head, but with an uneasy feeling, so vicious was the boy's
demeanour, that it was not altogether a game.

'You're a traitor!' yelled the boy. 'You're a thought-criminal! You're a
Eurasian spy! I'll shoot you, I'll vaporize you, I'll send you to the salt
mines!'

Suddenly they were both leaping round him, shouting 'Traitor!' and
'Thought-criminal!' the little girl imitating her brother in every
movement. It was somehow slightly frightening, like the gambolling of
tiger cubs which will soon grow up into man-eaters. There was a sort of
calculating ferocity in the boy's eye, a quite evident desire to hit or
kick Winston and a consciousness of being very nearly big enough to do so.
It was a good job it was not a real pistol he was holding, Winston thought.

Mrs Parsons' eyes flitted nervously from Winston to the children, and back
again. In the better light of the living-room he noticed with interest
that there actually was dust in the creases of her face.

'They do get so noisy,' she said. 'They're disappointed because they
couldn't go to see the hanging, that's what it is. I'm too busy to take
them. and Tom won't be back from work in time.'

'Why can't we go and see the hanging?' roared the boy in his huge voice.

'Want to see the hanging! Want to see the hanging!' chanted the little
girl, still capering round.

Some Eurasian prisoners, guilty of war crimes, were to be hanged in the
Park that evening, Winston remembered. This happened about once a month,
and was a popular spectacle. Children always clamoured to be taken to see
it. He took his leave of Mrs Parsons and made for the door. But he had not
gone six steps down the passage when something hit the back of his neck an
agonizingly painful blow. It was as though a red-hot wire had been jabbed
into him. He spun round just in time to see Mrs Parsons dragging her son
back into the doorway while the boy pocketed a catapult.

'Goldstein!' bellowed the boy as the door closed on him. But what most
struck Winston was the look of helpless fright on the woman's greyish face.

Back in the flat he stepped quickly past the telescreen and sat down at the
table again, still rubbing his neck. The music from the telescreen had
stopped. Instead, a clipped military voice was reading out, with a sort of
brutal relish, a description of the armaments of the new Floating Fortress
which had just been anchored between Iceland and the Faroe Islands.

With those children, he thought, that wretched woman must lead a life of
terror. Another year, two years, and they would be watching her night
and day for symptoms of unorthodoxy. Nearly all children nowadays were
horrible. What was worst of all was that by means of such organizations as
the Spies they were systematically turned into ungovernable little savages,
and yet this produced in them no tendency whatever to rebel against the
discipline of the Party. On the contrary, they adored the Party and
everything connected with it. The songs, the processions, the banners, the
hiking, the drilling with dummy rifles, the yelling of slogans, the worship
of Big Brother--it was all a sort of glorious game to them. All their
ferocity was turned outwards, against the enemies of the State, against
foreigners, traitors, saboteurs, thought-criminals. It was almost normal
for people over thirty to be frightened of their own children. And with
good reason, for hardly a week passed in which 'The Times' did not carry
a paragraph describing how some eavesdropping little sneak--'child hero'
was the phrase generally used--had overheard some compromising remark
and denounced its parents to the Thought Police.

The sting of the catapult bullet had worn off. He picked up his pen
half-heartedly, wondering whether he could find something more to write
in the diary. Suddenly he began thinking of O'Brien again.

Years ago--how long was it? Seven years it must be--he had dreamed that he
was walking through a pitch-dark room. And someone sitting to one side of
him had said as he passed: 'We shall meet in the place where there is no
darkness.' It was said very quietly, almost casually--a statement, not a
command. He had walked on without pausing. What was curious was that at the
time, in the dream, the words had not made much impression on him. It was
only later and by degrees that they had seemed to take on significance. He
could not now remember whether it was before or after having the dream that
he had seen O'Brien for the first time, nor could he remember when he had
first identified the voice as O'Brien's. But at any rate the identification
existed. It was O'Brien who had spoken to him out of the dark.

Winston had never been able to feel sure--even after this morning's flash
of the eyes it was still impossible to be sure whether O'Brien was a friend
or an enemy. Nor did it even seem to matter greatly. There was a link of
understanding between them, more important than affection or partisanship.
'We shall meet in the place where there is no darkness,' he had said.
Winston did not know what it meant, only that in some way or another it
would come true.

The voice from the telescreen paused. A trumpet call, clear and beautiful,
floated into the stagnant air. The voice continued raspingly:

'Attention! Your attention, please! A newsflash has this moment arrived
from the Malabar front. Our forces in South India have won a glorious
victory. I am authorized to say that the action we are now reporting may
well bring the war within measurable distance of its end. Here is the
newsflash----'

Bad news coming, thought Winston. And sure enough, following on a gory
description of the annihilation of a Eurasian army, with stupendous figures
of killed and prisoners, came the announcement that, as from next week,
the chocolate ration would be reduced from thirty grammes to twenty.

Winston belched again. The gin was wearing off, leaving a deflated feeling.
The telescreen--perhaps to celebrate the victory, perhaps to drown the
memory of the lost chocolate--crashed into 'Oceania, 'tis for thee'. You
were supposed to stand to attention. However, in his present position he
was invisible.

'Oceania, 'tis for thee' gave way to lighter music. Winston walked over to
the window, keeping his back to the telescreen. The day was still cold and
clear. Somewhere far away a rocket bomb exploded with a dull, reverberating
roar. About twenty or thirty of them a week were falling on London at
present.

Down in the street the wind flapped the torn poster to and fro, and the
word INGSOC fitfully appeared and vanished. Ingsoc. The sacred principles
of Ingsoc. Newspeak, doublethink, the mutability of the past. He felt as
though he were wandering in the forests of the sea bottom, lost in a
monstrous world where he himself was the monster. He was alone. The past
was dead, the future was unimaginable. What certainty had he that a single
human creature now living was on his side? And what way of knowing that the
dominion of the Party would not endure FOR EVER? Like an answer, the three
slogans on the white face of the Ministry of Truth came back to him:


  WAR IS PEACE
  FREEDOM IS SLAVERY
  IGNORANCE IS STRENGTH


He took a twenty-five cent piece out of his pocket. There, too, in tiny
clear lettering, the same slogans were inscribed, and on the other face of
the coin the head of Big Brother. Even from the coin the eyes pursued you.
On coins, on stamps, on the covers of books, on banners, on posters, and on
the wrappings of a cigarette packet--everywhere. Always the eyes watching
you and the voice enveloping you. Asleep or awake, working or eating,
indoors or out of doors, in the bath or in bed--no escape. Nothing was your
own except the few cubic centimetres inside your skull.

The sun had shifted round, and the myriad windows of the Ministry of Truth,
with the light no longer shining on them, looked grim as the loopholes of a
fortress. His heart quailed before the enormous pyramidal shape. It was too
strong, it could not be stormed. A thousand rocket bombs would not batter
it down. He wondered again for whom he was writing the diary. For the
future, for the past--for an age that might be imaginary. And in front of
him there lay not death but annihilation. The diary would be reduced to
ashes and himself to vapour. Only the Thought Police would read what he had
written, before they wiped it out of existence and out of memory. How could
you make appeal to the future when not a trace of you, not even an
anonymous word scribbled on a piece of paper, could physically survive?

The telescreen struck fourteen. He must leave in ten minutes. He had to be
back at work by fourteen-thirty.

Curiously, the chiming of the hour seemed to have put new heart into him.
He was a lonely ghost uttering a truth that nobody would ever hear. But so
long as he uttered it, in some obscure way the continuity was not broken.
It was not by making yourself heard but by staying sane that you carried on
the human heritage. He went back to the table, dipped his pen, and wrote:


   To the future or to the past, to a time when thought is free, when men
are different from one another and do not live alone--to a time when truth
exists and what is done cannot be undone:
   From the age of uniformity, from the age of solitude, from the age of
Big Brother, from the age of doublethink--greetings!


He was already dead, he reflected. It seemed to him that it was only now,
when he had begun to be able to formulate his thoughts, that he had taken
the decisive step. The consequences of every act are included in the act
itself. He wrote:


   Thoughtcrime does not entail death: thoughtcrime IS death.


Now he had recognized himself as a dead man it became important to stay
alive as long as possible. Two fingers of his right hand were inkstained.
It was exactly the kind of detail that might betray you. Some nosing zealot
in the Ministry (a woman, probably: someone like the little sandy-haired
woman or the dark-haired girl from the Fiction Department) might start
wondering why he had been writing during the lunch interval, why he had
used an old-fashioned pen, WHAT he had been writing--and then drop a hint
in the appropriate quarter. He went to the bathroom and carefully scrubbed
the ink away with the gritty dark-brown soap which rasped your skin like
sandpaper and was therefore well adapted for this purpose.

He put the diary away in the drawer. It was quite useless to think of
hiding it, but he could at least make sure whether or not its existence had
been discovered. A hair laid across the page-ends was too obvious. With the
tip of his finger he picked up an identifiable grain of whitish dust and
deposited it on the corner of the cover, where it was bound to be shaken
off if the book was moved.




Chapter 3



Winston was dreaming of his mother.

He must, he thought, have been ten or eleven years old when his mother had
disappeared. She was a tall, statuesque, rather silent woman with slow
movements and magnificent fair hair. His father he remembered more vaguely
as dark and thin, dressed always in neat dark clothes (Winston remembered
especially the very thin soles of his father's shoes) and wearing
spectacles. The two of them must evidently have been swallowed up in one
of the first great purges of the fifties.

At this moment his mother was sitting in some place deep down beneath him,
with his young sister in her arms. He did not remember his sister at all,
except as a tiny, feeble baby, always silent, with large, watchful eyes.
Both of them were looking up at him. They were down in some subterranean
place--the bottom of a well, for instance, or a very deep grave--but it
was a place which, already far below him, was itself moving downwards.
They were in the saloon of a sinking ship, looking up at him through the
darkening water. There was still air in the saloon, they could still see
him and he them, but all the while they were sinking down, down into the
green waters which in another moment must hide them from sight for ever.
He was out in the light and air while they were being sucked down to death,
and they were down there because he was up here. He knew it and they knew
it, and he could see the knowledge in their faces. There was no reproach
either in their faces or in their hearts, only the knowledge that they
must die in order that he might remain alive, and that this was part of
the unavoidable order of things.

He could not remember what had happened, but he knew in his dream that in
some way the lives of his mother and his sister had been sacrificed to his
own. It was one of those dreams which, while retaining the characteristic
dream scenery, are a continuation of one's intellectual life, and in which
one becomes aware of facts and ideas which still seem new and valuable
after one is awake. The thing that now suddenly struck Winston was that his
mother's death, nearly thirty years ago, had been tragic and sorrowful in
a way that was no longer possible. Tragedy, he perceived, belonged to the
ancient time, to a time when there was still privacy, love, and friendship,
and when the members of a family stood by one another without needing to
know the reason. His mother's memory tore at his heart because she had died
loving him, when he was too young and selfish to love her in return, and
because somehow, he did not remember how, she had sacrificed herself to a
conception of loyalty that was private and unalterable. Such things, he
saw, could not happen today. Today there were fear, hatred, and pain, but
no dignity of emotion, no deep or complex sorrows. All this he seemed to
see in the large eyes of his mother and his sister, looking up at him
through the green water, hundreds of fathoms down and still sinking.

Suddenly he was standing on short springy turf, on a summer evening when
the slanting rays of the sun gilded the ground. The landscape that he was
looking at recurred so often in his dreams that he was never fully certain
whether or not he had seen it in the real world. In his waking thoughts he
called it the Golden Country. It was an old, rabbit-bitten pasture, with a
foot-track wandering across it and a molehill here and there. In the ragged
hedge on the opposite side of the field the boughs of the elm trees were
swaying very faintly in the breeze, their leaves just stirring in dense
masses like women's hair. Somewhere near at hand, though out of sight,
there was a clear, slow-moving stream where dace were swimming in the
pools under the willow trees.

The girl with dark hair was coming towards them across the field. With
what seemed a single movement she tore off her clothes and flung them
disdainfully aside. Her body was white and smooth, but it aroused no desire
in him, indeed he barely looked at it. What overwhelmed him in that instant
was admiration for the gesture with which she had thrown her clothes aside.
With its grace and carelessness it seemed to annihilate a whole culture,
a whole system of thought, as though Big Brother and the Party and the
Thought Police could all be swept into nothingness by a single splendid
movement of the arm. That too was a gesture belonging to the ancient time.
Winston woke up with the word 'Shakespeare' on his lips.

The telescreen was giving forth an ear-splitting whistle which continued on
the same note for thirty seconds. It was nought seven fifteen, getting-up
time for office workers. Winston wrenched his body out of bed--naked, for
a member of the Outer Party received only 3,000 clothing coupons annually,
and a suit of pyjamas was 600--and seized a dingy singlet and a pair of
shorts that were lying across a chair. The Physical Jerks would begin in
three minutes. The next moment he was doubled up by a violent coughing fit
which nearly always attacked him soon after waking up. It emptied his lungs
so completely that he could only begin breathing again by lying on his back
and taking a series of deep gasps. His veins had swelled with the effort of
the cough, and the varicose ulcer had started itching.

'Thirty to forty group!' yapped a piercing female voice. 'Thirty to forty
group! Take your places, please. Thirties to forties!'

Winston sprang to attention in front of the telescreen, upon which the
image of a youngish woman, scrawny but muscular, dressed in tunic and
gym-shoes, had already appeared.

'Arms bending and stretching!' she rapped out. 'Take your time by me. ONE,
two, three, four! ONE, two, three, four! Come on, comrades, put a bit of
life into it! ONE, two, three four! ONE two, three, four!...'

The pain of the coughing fit had not quite driven out of Winston's mind the
impression made by his dream, and the rhythmic movements of the exercise
restored it somewhat. As he mechanically shot his arms back and forth,
wearing on his face the look of grim enjoyment which was considered proper
during the Physical Jerks, he was struggling to think his way backward into
the dim period of his early childhood. It was extraordinarily difficult.
Beyond the late fifties everything faded. When there were no external
records that you could refer to, even the outline of your own life lost
its sharpness. You remembered huge events which had quite probably not
happened, you remembered the detail of incidents without being able to
recapture their atmosphere, and there were long blank periods to which you
could assign nothing. Everything had been different then. Even the names of
countries, and their shapes on the map, had been different. Airstrip One,
for instance, had not been so called in those days: it had been called
England or Britain, though London, he felt fairly certain, had always been
called London.

Winston could not definitely remember a time when his country had not been
at war, but it was evident that there had been a fairly long interval of
peace during his childhood, because one of his early memories was of an air
raid which appeared to take everyone by surprise. Perhaps it was the time
when the atomic bomb had fallen on Colchester. He did not remember the raid
itself, but he did remember his father's hand clutching his own as they
hurried down, down, down into some place deep in the earth, round and round
a spiral staircase which rang under his feet and which finally so wearied
his legs that he began whimpering and they had to stop and rest. His
mother, in her slow, dreamy way, was following a long way behind them. She
was carrying his baby sister--or perhaps it was only a bundle of blankets
that she was carrying: he was not certain whether his sister had been born
then. Finally they had emerged into a noisy, crowded place which he had
realized to be a Tube station.

There were people sitting all over the stone-flagged floor, and other
people, packed tightly together, were sitting on metal bunks, one above
the other. Winston and his mother and father found themselves a place on
the floor, and near them an old man and an old woman were sitting side by
side on a bunk. The old man had on a decent dark suit and a black cloth cap
pushed back from very white hair: his face was scarlet and his eyes were
blue and full of tears. He reeked of gin. It seemed to breathe out of his
skin in place of sweat, and one could have fancied that the tears welling
from his eyes were pure gin. But though slightly drunk he was also
suffering under some grief that was genuine and unbearable. In his childish
way Winston grasped that some terrible thing, something that was beyond
forgiveness and could never be remedied, had just happened. It also seemed
to him that he knew what it was. Someone whom the old man loved--a little
granddaughter, perhaps--had been killed. Every few minutes the old man kept
repeating:

'We didn't ought to 'ave trusted 'em. I said so, Ma, didn't I? That's what
comes of trusting 'em. I said so all along. We didn't ought to 'ave trusted
the buggers.'

But which buggers they didn't ought to have trusted Winston could not now
remember.

Since about that time, war had been literally continuous, though strictly
speaking it had not always been the same war. For several months during his
childhood there had been confused street fighting in London itself, some
of which he remembered vividly. But to trace out the history of the whole
period, to say who was fighting whom at any given moment, would have been
utterly impossible, since no written record, and no spoken word, ever made
mention of any other alignment than the existing one. At this moment, for
example, in 1984 (if it was 1984), Oceania was at war with Eurasia and
in alliance with Eastasia. In no public or private utterance was it ever
admitted that the three powers had at any time been grouped along different
lines. Actually, as Winston well knew, it was only four years since Oceania
had been at war with Eastasia and in alliance with Eurasia. But that was
merely a piece of furtive knowledge which he happened to possess because
his memory was not satisfactorily under control. Officially the change of
partners had never happened. Oceania was at war with Eurasia: therefore
Oceania had always been at war with Eurasia. The enemy of the moment always
represented absolute evil, and it followed that any past or future
agreement with him was impossible.

The frightening thing, he reflected for the ten thousandth time as he
forced his shoulders painfully backward (with hands on hips, they were
gyrating their bodies from the waist, an exercise that was supposed to be
good for the back muscles)--the frightening thing was that it might all be
true. If the Party could thrust its hand into the past and say of this or
that event, IT NEVER HAPPENED--that, surely, was more terrifying than mere
torture and death?

The Party said that Oceania had never been in alliance with Eurasia. He,
Winston Smith, knew that Oceania had been in alliance with Eurasia as short
a time as four years ago. But where did that knowledge exist? Only in his
own consciousness, which in any case must soon be annihilated. And if all
others accepted the lie which the Party imposed--if all records told the
same tale--then the lie passed into history and became truth. 'Who controls
the past,' ran the Party slogan, 'controls the future: who controls the
present controls the past.' And yet the past, though of its nature
alterable, never had been altered. Whatever was true now was true from
everlasting to everlasting. It was quite simple. All that was needed was
an unending series of victories over your own memory. 'Reality control',
they called it: in Newspeak, 'doublethink'.

'Stand easy!' barked the instructress, a little more genially.

Winston sank his arms to his sides and slowly refilled his lungs with air.
His mind slid away into the labyrinthine world of doublethink. To know
and not to know, to be conscious of complete truthfulness while telling
carefully constructed lies, to hold simultaneously two opinions which
cancelled out, knowing them to be contradictory and believing in both of
them, to use logic against logic, to repudiate morality while laying claim
to it, to believe that democracy was impossible and that the Party was the
guardian of democracy, to forget whatever it was necessary to forget, then
to draw it back into memory again at the moment when it was needed, and
then promptly to forget it again: and above all, to apply the same process
to the process itself. That was the ultimate subtlety: consciously to
induce unconsciousness, and then, once again, to become unconscious of
the act of hypnosis you had just performed. Even to understand the word
'doublethink' involved the use of doublethink.

The instructress had called them to attention again. 'And now let's see
which of us can touch our toes!' she said enthusiastically. 'Right over
from the hips, please, comrades. ONE-two! ONE-two!...'

Winston loathed this exercise, which sent shooting pains all the way from
his heels to his buttocks and often ended by bringing on another coughing
fit. The half-pleasant quality went out of his meditations. The past, he
reflected, had not merely been altered, it had been actually destroyed. For
how could you establish even the most obvious fact when there existed no
record outside your own memory? He tried to remember in what year he had
first heard mention of Big Brother. He thought it must have been at some
time in the sixties, but it was impossible to be certain. In the Party
histories, of course, Big Brother figured as the leader and guardian of the
Revolution since its very earliest days. His exploits had been gradually
pushed backwards in time until already they extended into the fabulous
world of the forties and the thirties, when the capitalists in their
strange cylindrical hats still rode through the streets of London in great
gleaming motor-cars or horse carriages with glass sides. There was no
knowing how much of this legend was true and how much invented. Winston
could not even remember at what date the Party itself had come into
existence. He did not believe he had ever heard the word Ingsoc before
1960, but it was possible that in its Oldspeak form--'English Socialism',
that is to say--it had been current earlier. Everything melted into mist.
Sometimes, indeed, you could put your finger on a definite lie. It was not
true, for example, as was claimed in the Party history books, that the
Party had invented aeroplanes. He remembered aeroplanes since his earliest
childhood. But you could prove nothing. There was never any evidence. Just
once in his whole life he had held in his hands unmistakable documentary
proof of the falsification of an historical fact. And on that occasion----

'Smith!' screamed the shrewish voice from the telescreen. '6079 Smith W.!
Yes, YOU! Bend lower, please! You can do better than that. You're not
trying. Lower, please! THAT'S better, comrade. Now stand at ease, the
whole squad, and watch me.'

A sudden hot sweat had broken out all over Winston's body. His face
remained completely inscrutable. Never show dismay! Never show resentment!
A single flicker of the eyes could give you away. He stood watching while
the instructress raised her arms above her head and--one could not say
gracefully, but with remarkable neatness and efficiency--bent over and
tucked the first joint of her fingers under her toes.

'THERE, comrades! THAT'S how I want to see you doing it. Watch me again.
I'm thirty-nine and I've had four children. Now look.' She bent over again.
'You see MY knees aren't bent. You can all do it if you want to,' she added
as she straightened herself up. 'Anyone under forty-five is perfectly
capable of touching his toes. We don't all have the privilege of fighting
in the front line, but at least we can all keep fit. Remember our boys on
the Malabar front! And the sailors in the Floating Fortresses! Just think
what THEY have to put up with. Now try again. That's better, comrade,
that's MUCH better,' she added encouragingly as Winston, with a violent
lunge, succeeded in touching his toes with knees unbent, for the first
time in several years.




Chapter 4



With the deep, unconscious sigh which not even the nearness of the
telescreen could prevent him from uttering when his day's work started,
Winston pulled the speakwrite towards him, blew the dust from its
mouthpiece, and put on his spectacles. Then he unrolled and clipped
together four small cylinders of paper which had already flopped out of
the pneumatic tube on the right-hand side of his desk.

In the walls of the cubicle there were three orifices. To the right of the
speakwrite, a small pneumatic tube for written messages, to the left, a
larger one for newspapers; and in the side wall, within easy reach of
Winston's arm, a large oblong slit protected by a wire grating. This last
was for the disposal of waste paper. Similar slits existed in thousands or
tens of thousands throughout the building, not only in every room but at
short intervals in every corridor. For some reason they were nicknamed
memory holes. When one knew that any document was due for destruction, or
even when one saw a scrap of waste paper lying about, it was an automatic
action to lift the flap of the nearest memory hole and drop it in,
whereupon it would be whirled away on a current of warm air to the enormous
furnaces which were hidden somewhere in the recesses of the building.

Winston examined the four slips of paper which he had unrolled. Each
contained a message of only one or two lines, in the abbreviated
jargon--not actually Newspeak, but consisting
largely of Newspeak words--which was used in the Ministry for internal
purposes. They ran:


times 17.3.84 bb speech malreported africa rectify

times 19.12.83 forecasts 3 yp 4th quarter 83 misprints verify current issue

times 14.2.84 miniplenty malquoted chocolate rectify

times 3.12.83 reporting bb dayorder doubleplusungood refs unpersons rewrite
fullwise upsub antefiling


With a faint feeling of satisfaction Winston laid the fourth message aside.
It was an intricate and responsible job and had better be dealt with last.
The other three were routine matters, though the second one would probably
mean some tedious wading through lists of figures.

Winston dialled 'back numbers' on the telescreen and called for the
appropriate issues of 'The Times', which slid out of the pneumatic tube
after only a few minutes' delay. The messages he had received referred to
articles or news items which for one reason or another it was thought
necessary to alter, or, as the official phrase had it, to rectify. For
example, it appeared from 'The Times' of the seventeenth of March that Big
Brother, in his speech of the previous day, had predicted that the South
Indian front would remain quiet but that a Eurasian offensive would shortly
be launched in North Africa. As it happened, the Eurasian Higher Command
had launched its offensive in South India and left North Africa alone. It
was therefore necessary to rewrite a paragraph of Big Brother's speech, in
such a way as to make him predict the thing that had actually happened. Or
again, 'The Times' of the nineteenth of December had published the official
forecasts of the output of various classes of consumption goods in the
fourth quarter of 1983, which was also the sixth quarter of the Ninth
Three-Year Plan. Today's issue contained a statement of the actual output,
from which it appeared that the forecasts were in every instance grossly
wrong. Winston's job was to rectify the original figures by making them
agree with the later ones. As for the third message, it referred to a very
simple error which could be set right in a couple of minutes. As short
a time ago as February, the Ministry of Plenty had issued a promise
(a 'categorical pledge' were the official words) that there would be
no reduction of the chocolate ration during 1984. Actually, as Winston
was aware, the chocolate ration was to be reduced from thirty grammes
to twenty at the end of the present week. All that was needed was to
substitute for the original promise a warning that it would probably be
necessary to reduce the ration at some time in April.

As soon as Winston had dealt with each of the messages, he clipped his
speakwritten corrections to the appropriate copy of 'The Times' and pushed
them into the pneumatic tube. Then, with a movement which was as nearly as
possible unconscious, he crumpled up the original message and any notes
that he himself had made, and dropped them into the memory hole to be
devoured by the flames.

What happened in the unseen labyrinth to which the pneumatic tubes led, he
did not know in detail, but he did know in general terms. As soon as all
the corrections which happened to be necessary in any particular number
of 'The Times' had been assembled and collated, that number would be
reprinted, the original copy destroyed, and the corrected copy placed on
the files in its stead. This process of continuous alteration was applied
not only to newspapers, but to books, periodicals, pamphlets, posters,
leaflets, films, sound-tracks, cartoons, photographs--to every kind of
literature or documentation which might conceivably hold any political or
ideological significance. Day by day and almost minute by minute the past
was brought up to date. In this way every prediction made by the Party
could be shown by documentary evidence to have been correct, nor was any
item of news, or any expression of opinion, which conflicted with the
needs of the moment, ever allowed to remain on record. All history was
a palimpsest, scraped clean and reinscribed exactly as often as was
necessary. In no case would it have been possible, once the deed was done,
to prove that any falsification had taken place. The largest section of
the Records Department, far larger than the one on which Winston worked,
consisted simply of persons whose duty it was to track down and collect all
copies of books, newspapers, and other documents which had been superseded
and were due for destruction. A number of 'The Times' which might, because
of changes in political alignment, or mistaken prophecies uttered by Big
Brother, have been rewritten a dozen times still stood on the files bearing
its original date, and no other copy existed to contradict it. Books, also,
were recalled and rewritten again and again, and were invariably reissued
without any admission that any alteration had been made. Even the written
instructions which Winston received, and which he invariably got rid of
as soon as he had dealt with them, never stated or implied that an act of
forgery was to be committed: always the reference was to slips, errors,
misprints, or misquotations which it was necessary to put right in the
interests of accuracy.

But actually, he thought as he re-adjusted the Ministry of Plenty's
figures, it was not even forgery. It was merely the substitution of one
piece of nonsense for another. Most of the material that you were dealing
with had no connexion with anything in the real world, not even the kind of
connexion that is contained in a direct lie. Statistics were just as much
a fantasy in their original version as in their rectified version. A great
deal of the time you were expected to make them up out of your head. For
example, the Ministry of Plenty's forecast had estimated the output of
boots for the quarter at 145 million pairs. The actual output was given as
sixty-two millions. Winston, however, in rewriting the forecast, marked
the figure down to fifty-seven millions, so as to allow for the usual claim
that the quota had been overfulfilled. In any case, sixty-two millions was
no nearer the truth than fifty-seven millions, or than 145 millions. Very
likely no boots had been produced at all. Likelier still, nobody knew
how many had been produced, much less cared. All one knew was that every
quarter astronomical numbers of boots were produced on paper, while perhaps
half the population of Oceania went barefoot. And so it was with every
class of recorded fact, great or small. Everything faded away into a
shadow-world in which, finally, even the date of the year had become
uncertain.

Winston glanced across the hall. In the corresponding cubicle on the other
side a small, precise-looking, dark-chinned man named Tillotson was working
steadily away, with a folded newspaper on his knee and his mouth very close
to the mouthpiece of the speakwrite. He had the air of trying to keep what
he was saying a secret between himself and the telescreen. He looked up,
and his spectacles darted a hostile flash in Winston's direction.

Winston hardly knew Tillotson, and had no idea what work he was employed
on. People in the Records Department did not readily talk about their jobs.
In the long, windowless hall, with its double row of cubicles and its
endless rustle of papers and hum of voices murmuring into speakwrites,
there were quite a dozen people whom Winston did not even know by name,
though he daily saw them hurrying to and fro in the corridors or
gesticulating in the Two Minutes Hate. He knew that in the cubicle next
to him the little woman with sandy hair toiled day in day out, simply at
tracking down and deleting from the Press the names of people who had been
vaporized and were therefore considered never to have existed. There was a
certain fitness in this, since her own husband had been vaporized a couple
of years earlier. And a few cubicles away a mild, ineffectual, dreamy
creature named Ampleforth, with very hairy ears and a surprising talent
for juggling with rhymes and metres, was engaged in producing garbled
versions--definitive texts, they were called--of poems which had become
ideologically offensive, but which for one reason or another were to be
retained in the anthologies. And this hall, with its fifty workers or
thereabouts, was only one sub-section, a single cell, as it were, in the
huge complexity of the Records Department. Beyond, above, below, were other
swarms of workers engaged in an unimaginable multitude of jobs. There were
the huge printing-shops with their sub-editors, their typography experts,
and their elaborately equipped studios for the faking of photographs. There
was the tele-programmes section with its engineers, its producers, and its
teams of actors specially chosen for their skill in imitating voices. There
were the armies of reference clerks whose job was simply to draw up lists
of books and periodicals which were due for recall. There were the vast
repositories where the corrected documents were stored, and the hidden
furnaces where the original copies were destroyed. And somewhere or other,
quite anonymous, there were the directing brains who co-ordinated the whole
effort and laid down the lines of policy which made it necessary that this
fragment of the past should be preserved, that one falsified, and the other
rubbed out of existence.

And the Records Department, after all, was itself only a single branch of
the Ministry of Truth, whose primary job was not to reconstruct the past
but to supply the citizens of Oceania with newspapers, films, textbooks,
telescreen programmes, plays, novels--with every conceivable kind of
information, instruction, or entertainment, from a statue to a slogan,
from a lyric poem to a biological treatise, and from a child's
spelling-book to a Newspeak dictionary. And the Ministry had not only to
supply the multifarious needs of the party, but also to repeat the whole
operation at a lower level for the benefit of the proletariat. There
was a whole chain of separate departments dealing with proletarian
literature, music, drama, and entertainment generally. Here were produced
rubbishy newspapers containing almost nothing except sport, crime and
astrology, sensational five-cent novelettes, films oozing with sex, and
sentimental songs which were composed entirely by mechanical means on a
special kind of kaleidoscope known as a versificator. There was even
a whole sub-section--Pornosec, it was called in Newspeak--engaged in
producing the lowest kind of pornography, which was sent out in sealed
packets and which no Party member, other than those who worked on it,
was permitted to look at.

Three messages had slid out of the pneumatic tube while Winston was
working, but they were simple matters, and he had disposed of them before
the Two Minutes Hate interrupted him. When the Hate was over he returned
to his cubicle, took the Newspeak dictionary from the shelf, pushed the
speakwrite to one side, cleaned his spectacles, and settled down to his
main job of the morning.

Winston's greatest pleasure in life was in his work. Most of it was a
tedious routine, but included in it there were also jobs so difficult and
intricate that you could lose yourself in them as in the depths of a
mathematical problem--delicate pieces of forgery in which you had nothing
to guide you except your knowledge of the principles of Ingsoc and your
estimate of what the Party wanted you to say. Winston was good at this kind
of thing. On occasion he had even been entrusted with the rectification of
'The Times' leading articles, which were written entirely in Newspeak.
He unrolled the message that he had set aside earlier. It ran:


   times 3.12.83 reporting bb dayorder doubleplusungood refs unpersons
rewrite fullwise upsub antefiling


In Oldspeak (or standard English) this might be rendered:


The reporting of Big Brother's Order for the Day in 'The Times' of December
3rd 1983 is extremely unsatisfactory and makes references to non-existent
persons. Rewrite it in full and submit your draft to higher authority
before filing.


Winston read through the offending article. Big Brother's Order for the
Day, it seemed, had been chiefly devoted to praising the work of an
organization known as FFCC, which supplied cigarettes and other comforts
to the sailors in the Floating Fortresses. A certain Comrade Withers, a
prominent member of the Inner Party, had been singled out for special
mention and awarded a decoration, the Order of Conspicuous Merit, Second
Class.

Three months later FFCC had suddenly been dissolved with no reasons given.
One could assume that Withers and his associates were now in disgrace, but
there had been no report of the matter in the Press or on the telescreen.
That was to be expected, since it was unusual for political offenders to
be put on trial or even publicly denounced. The great purges involving
thousands of people, with public trials of traitors and thought-criminals
who made abject confession of their crimes and were afterwards executed,
were special show-pieces not occurring oftener than once in a couple of
years. More commonly, people who had incurred the displeasure of the
Party simply disappeared and were never heard of again. One never had the
smallest clue as to what had happened to them. In some cases they might
not even be dead. Perhaps thirty people personally known to Winston, not
counting his parents, had disappeared at one time or another.

Winston stroked his nose gently with a paper-clip. In the cubicle
across the way Comrade Tillotson was still crouching secretively over
his speakwrite. He raised his head for a moment: again the hostile
spectacle-flash. Winston wondered whether Comrade Tillotson was engaged
on the same job as himself. It was perfectly possible. So tricky a piece
of work would never be entrusted to a single person: on the other hand,
to turn it over to a committee would be to admit openly that an act of
fabrication was taking place. Very likely as many as a dozen people were
now working away on rival versions of what Big Brother had actually said.
And presently some master brain in the Inner Party would select this
version or that, would re-edit it and set in motion the complex processes
of cross-referencing that would be required, and then the chosen lie
would pass into the permanent records and become truth.

Winston did not know why Withers had been disgraced. Perhaps it was for
corruption or incompetence. Perhaps Big Brother was merely getting rid of
a too-popular subordinate. Perhaps Withers or someone close to him had
been suspected of heretical tendencies. Or perhaps--what was likeliest of
all--the thing had simply happened because purges and vaporizations were a
necessary part of the mechanics of government. The only real clue lay in
the words 'refs unpersons', which indicated that Withers was already dead.
You could not invariably assume this to be the case when people were
arrested. Sometimes they were released and allowed to remain at liberty
for as much as a year or two years before being executed. Very occasionally
some person whom you had believed dead long since would make a ghostly
reappearance at some public trial where he would implicate hundreds of
others by his testimony before vanishing, this time for ever. Withers,
however, was already an UNPERSON. He did not exist: he had never existed.
Winston decided that it would not be enough simply to reverse the tendency
of Big Brother's speech. It was better to make it deal with something
totally unconnected with its original subject.

He might turn the speech into the usual denunciation of traitors and
thought-criminals, but that was a little too obvious, while to invent a
victory at the front, or some triumph of over-production in the Ninth
Three-Year Plan, might complicate the records too much. What was needed
was a piece of pure fantasy. Suddenly there sprang into his mind, ready
made as it were, the image of a certain Comrade Ogilvy, who had recently
died in battle, in heroic circumstances. There were occasions when Big
Brother devoted his Order for the Day to commemorating some humble,
rank-and-file Party member whose life and death he held up as an example
worthy to be followed. Today he should commemorate Comrade Ogilvy. It was
true that there was no such person as Comrade Ogilvy, but a few lines of
print and a couple of faked photographs would soon bring him into
existence.

Winston thought for a moment, then pulled the speakwrite towards him and
began dictating in Big Brother's familiar style: a style at once military
and pedantic, and, because of a trick of asking questions and then
promptly answering them ('What lessons do we learn from this fact,
comrades? The lesson--which is also one of the fundamental principles
of Ingsoc--that,' etc., etc.), easy to imitate.

At the age of three Comrade Ogilvy had refused all toys except a drum, a
sub-machine gun, and a model helicopter. At six--a year early, by a special
relaxation of the rules--he had joined the Spies, at nine he had been a
troop leader. At eleven he had denounced his uncle to the Thought Police
after overhearing a conversation which appeared to him to have criminal
tendencies. At seventeen he had been a district organizer of the Junior
Anti-Sex League. At nineteen he had designed a hand-grenade which had
been adopted by the Ministry of Peace and which, at its first trial, had
killed thirty-one Eurasian prisoners in one burst. At twenty-three he had
perished in action. Pursued by enemy jet planes while flying over the
Indian Ocean with important despatches, he had weighted his body with his
machine gun and leapt out of the helicopter into deep water, despatches
and all--an end, said Big Brother, which it was impossible to contemplate
without feelings of envy. Big Brother added a few remarks on the purity
and single-mindedness of Comrade Ogilvy's life. He was a total abstainer
and a nonsmoker, had no recreations except a daily hour in the gymnasium,
and had taken a vow of celibacy, believing marriage and the care of a
family to be incompatible with a twenty-four-hour-a-day devotion to duty.
He had no subjects of conversation except the principles of Ingsoc, and
no aim in life except the defeat of the Eurasian enemy and the hunting-down
of spies, saboteurs, thought-criminals, and traitors generally.

Winston debated with himself whether to award Comrade Ogilvy the Order of
Conspicuous Merit: in the end he decided against it because of the
unnecessary cross-referencing that it would entail.

Once again he glanced at his rival in the opposite cubicle. Something
seemed to tell him with certainty that Tillotson was busy on the same job
as himself. There was no way of knowing whose job would finally be adopted,
but he felt a profound conviction that it would be his own. Comrade Ogilvy,
unimagined an hour ago, was now a fact. It struck him as curious that you
could create dead men but not living ones. Comrade Ogilvy, who had never
existed in the present, now existed in the past, and when once the act of
forgery was forgotten, he would exist just as authentically, and upon the
same evidence, as Charlemagne or Julius Caesar.




Chapter 5



In the low-ceilinged canteen, deep underground, the lunch queue jerked
slowly forward. The room was already very full and deafeningly noisy. From
the grille at the counter the steam of stew came pouring forth, with a sour
metallic smell which did not quite overcome the fumes of Victory Gin. On
the far side of the room there was a small bar, a mere hole in the wall,
where gin could be bought at ten cents the large nip.

'Just the man I was looking for,' said a voice at Winston's back.

He turned round. It was his friend Syme, who worked in the Research
Department. Perhaps 'friend' was not exactly the right word. You did not
have friends nowadays, you had comrades: but there were some comrades whose
society was pleasanter than that of others. Syme was a philologist, a
specialist in Newspeak. Indeed, he was one of the enormous team of experts
now engaged in compiling the Eleventh Edition of the Newspeak Dictionary.
He was a tiny creature, smaller than Winston, with dark hair and large,
protuberant eyes, at once mournful and derisive, which seemed to search
your face closely while he was speaking to you.

'I wanted to ask you whether you'd got any razor blades,' he said.

'Not one!' said Winston with a sort of guilty haste. 'I've tried all over
the place. They don't exist any longer.'

Everyone kept asking you for razor blades. Actually he had two unused ones
which he was hoarding up. There had been a famine of them for months past.
At any given moment there was some necessary article which the Party shops
were unable to supply. Sometimes it was buttons, sometimes it was darning
wool, sometimes it was shoelaces; at present it was razor blades. You could
only get hold of them, if at all, by scrounging more or less furtively on
the 'free' market.

'I've been using the same blade for six weeks,' he added untruthfully.

The queue gave another jerk forward. As they halted he turned and faced
Syme again. Each of them took a greasy metal tray from a pile at the end
of the counter.

'Did you go and see the prisoners hanged yesterday?' said Syme.

'I was working,' said Winston indifferently. 'I shall see it on the
flicks, I suppose.'

'A very inadequate substitute,' said Syme.

His mocking eyes roved over Winston's face. 'I know you,' the eyes seemed
to say, 'I see through you. I know very well why you didn't go to see
those prisoners hanged.' In an intellectual way, Syme was venomously
orthodox. He would talk with a disagreeable gloating satisfaction of
helicopter raids on enemy villages, and trials and confessions of
thought-criminals, the executions in the cellars of the Ministry of Love.
Talking to him was largely a matter of getting him away from such subjects
and entangling him, if possible, in the technicalities of Newspeak, on
which he was authoritative and interesting. Winston turned his head a
little aside to avoid the scrutiny of the large dark eyes.

'It was a good hanging,' said Syme reminiscently. 'I think it spoils it
when they tie their feet together. I like to see them kicking. And above
all, at the end, the tongue sticking right out, and blue--a quite bright
blue. That's the detail that appeals to me.'

'Nex', please!' yelled the white-aproned prole with the ladle.

Winston and Syme pushed their trays beneath the grille. On to each was
dumped swiftly the regulation lunch--a metal pannikin of pinkish-grey stew,
a hunk of bread, a cube of cheese, a mug of milkless Victory Coffee, and
one saccharine tablet.

'There's a table over there, under that telescreen,' said Syme. 'Let's pick
up a gin on the way.'

The gin was served out to them in handleless china mugs. They threaded
their way across the crowded room and unpacked their trays on to the
metal-topped table, on one corner of which someone had left a pool of stew,
a filthy liquid mess that had the appearance of vomit. Winston took up his
mug of gin, paused for an instant to collect his nerve, and gulped the
oily-tasting stuff down. When he had winked the tears out of his eyes he
suddenly discovered that he was hungry. He began swallowing spoonfuls of
the stew, which, in among its general sloppiness, had cubes of spongy
pinkish stuff which was probably a preparation of meat. Neither of them
spoke again till they had emptied their pannikins. From the table at
Winston's left, a little behind his back, someone was talking rapidly and
continuously, a harsh gabble almost like the quacking of a duck, which
pierced the general uproar of the room.

'How is the Dictionary getting on?' said Winston, raising his voice to
overcome the noise.

'Slowly,' said Syme. 'I'm on the adjectives. It's fascinating.'

He had brightened up immediately at the mention of Newspeak. He pushed his
pannikin aside, took up his hunk of bread in one delicate hand and his
cheese in the other, and leaned across the table so as to be able to speak
without shouting.

'The Eleventh Edition is the definitive edition,' he said. 'We're getting
the language into its final shape--the shape it's going to have when nobody
speaks anything else. When we've finished with it, people like you will
have to learn it all over again. You think, I dare say, that our chief job
is inventing new words. But not a bit of it! We're destroying words--scores
of them, hundreds of them, every day. We're cutting the language down to
the bone. The Eleventh Edition won't contain a single word that will become
obsolete before the year 2050.'

He bit hungrily into his bread and swallowed a couple of mouthfuls, then
continued speaking, with a sort of pedant's passion. His thin dark face
had become animated, his eyes had lost their mocking expression and grown
almost dreamy.

'It's a beautiful thing, the destruction of words. Of course the great
wastage is in the verbs and adjectives, but there are hundreds of nouns
that can be got rid of as well. It isn't only the synonyms; there are also
the antonyms. After all, what justification is there for a word which is
simply the opposite of some other word? A word contains its opposite in
itself. Take "good", for instance. If you have a word like "good", what
need is there for a word like "bad"? "Ungood" will do just as well--better,
because it's an exact opposite, which the other is not. Or again, if you
want a stronger version of "good", what sense is there in having a whole
string of vague useless words like "excellent" and "splendid" and all the
rest of them? "Plusgood" covers the meaning, or "doubleplusgood" if you
want something stronger still. Of course we use those forms already. but
in the final version of Newspeak there'll be nothing else. In the end the
whole notion of goodness and badness will be covered by only six words--in
reality, only one word. Don't you see the beauty of that, Winston? It was
B.B.'s idea originally, of course,' he added as an afterthought.

A sort of vapid eagerness flitted across Winston's face at the mention of
Big Brother. Nevertheless Syme immediately detected a certain lack of
enthusiasm.

'You haven't a real appreciation of Newspeak, Winston,' he said almost
sadly. 'Even when you write it you're still thinking in Oldspeak. I've read
some of those pieces that you write in "The Times" occasionally. They're
good enough, but they're translations. In your heart you'd prefer to stick
to Oldspeak, with all its vagueness and its useless shades of meaning.
You don't grasp the beauty of the destruction of words. Do you know that
Newspeak is the only language in the world whose vocabulary gets smaller
every year?'

Winston did know that, of course. He smiled, sympathetically he hoped, not
trusting himself to speak. Syme bit off another fragment of the
dark-coloured bread, chewed it briefly, and went on:

'Don't you see that the whole aim of Newspeak is to narrow the range of
thought? In the end we shall make thoughtcrime literally impossible,
because there will be no words in which to express it. Every concept that
can ever be needed, will be expressed by exactly one word, with its meaning
rigidly defined and all its subsidiary meanings rubbed out and forgotten.
Already, in the Eleventh Edition, we're not far from that point. But the
process will still be continuing long after you and I are dead. Every year
fewer and fewer words, and the range of consciousness always a little
smaller. Even now, of course, there's no reason or excuse for committing
thoughtcrime. It's merely a question of self-discipline, reality-control.
But in the end there won't be any need even for that. The Revolution will
be complete when the language is perfect. Newspeak is Ingsoc and Ingsoc
is Newspeak,' he added with a sort of mystical satisfaction. 'Has it ever
occurred to you, Winston, that by the year 2050, at the very latest, not a
single human being will be alive who could understand such a conversation
as we are having now?'

'Except----' began Winston doubtfully, and he stopped.

It had been on the tip of his tongue to say 'Except the proles,' but he
checked himself, not feeling fully certain that this remark was not in
some way unorthodox. Syme, however, had divined what he was about to say.

'The proles are not human beings,' he said carelessly. 'By 2050--earlier,
probably--all real knowledge of Oldspeak will have disappeared. The whole
literature of the past will have been destroyed. Chaucer, Shakespeare,
Milton, Byron--they'll exist only in Newspeak versions, not merely changed
into something different, but actually changed into something contradictory
of what they used to be. Even the literature of the Party will change.
Even the slogans will change. How could you have a slogan like "freedom is
slavery" when the concept of freedom has been abolished? The whole climate
of thought will be different. In fact there will be no thought, as we
understand it now. Orthodoxy means not thinking--not needing to think.
Orthodoxy is unconsciousness.'

One of these days, thought Winston with sudden deep conviction, Syme will
be vaporized. He is too intelligent. He sees too clearly and speaks too
plainly. The Party does not like such people. One day he will disappear.
It is written in his face.

Winston had finished his bread and cheese. He turned a little sideways
in his chair to drink his mug of coffee. At the table on his left the man
with the strident voice was still talking remorselessly away. A young
woman who was perhaps his secretary, and who was sitting with her back
to Winston, was listening to him and seemed to be eagerly agreeing with
everything that he said. From time to time Winston caught some such remark
as 'I think you're so right, I do so agree with you', uttered in a youthful
and rather silly feminine voice. But the other voice never stopped for an
instant, even when the girl was speaking. Winston knew the man by sight,
though he knew no more about him than that he held some important post
in the Fiction Department. He was a man of about thirty, with a muscular
throat and a large, mobile mouth. His head was thrown back a little, and
because of the angle at which he was sitting, his spectacles caught the
light and presented to Winston two blank discs instead of eyes. What was
slightly horrible, was that from the stream of sound that poured out of
his mouth it was almost impossible to distinguish a single word. Just
once Winston caught a phrase--'complete and final elimination of
Goldsteinism'--jerked out very rapidly and, as it seemed, all in one piece,
like a line of type cast solid. For the rest it was just a noise, a
quack-quack-quacking. And yet, though you could not actually hear what the
man was saying, you could not be in any doubt about its general nature.
He might be denouncing Goldstein and demanding sterner measures against
thought-criminals and saboteurs, he might be fulminating against the
atrocities of the Eurasian army, he might be praising Big Brother or the
heroes on the Malabar front--it made no difference. Whatever it was, you
could be certain that every word of it was pure orthodoxy, pure Ingsoc.
As he watched the eyeless face with the jaw moving rapidly up and down,
Winston had a curious feeling that this was not a real human being but
some kind of dummy. It was not the man's brain that was speaking, it was
his larynx. The stuff that was coming out of him consisted of words, but
it was not speech in the true sense: it was a noise uttered in
unconsciousness, like the quacking of a duck.

Syme had fallen silent for a moment, and with the handle of his spoon was
tracing patterns in the puddle of stew. The voice from the other table
quacked rapidly on, easily audible in spite of the surrounding din.

'There is a word in Newspeak,' said Syme, 'I don't know whether you know
it: DUCKSPEAK, to quack like a duck. It is one of those interesting words
that have two contradictory meanings. Applied to an opponent, it is abuse,
applied to someone you agree with, it is praise.'

Unquestionably Syme will be vaporized, Winston thought again. He thought
it with a kind of sadness, although well knowing that Syme despised him
and slightly disliked him, and was fully capable of denouncing him as a
thought-criminal if he saw any reason for doing so. There was something
subtly wrong with Syme. There was something that he lacked: discretion,
aloofness, a sort of saving stupidity. You could not say that he was
unorthodox. He believed in the principles of Ingsoc, he venerated Big
Brother, he rejoiced over victories, he hated heretics, not merely with
sincerity but with a sort of restless zeal, an up-to-dateness of
information, which the ordinary Party member did not approach. Yet a faint
air of disreputability always clung to him. He said things that would have
been better unsaid, he had read too many books, he frequented the Chestnut
Tree Cafe, haunt of painters and musicians. There was no law, not even an
unwritten law, against frequenting the Chestnut Tree Cafe, yet the place
was somehow ill-omened. The old, discredited leaders of the Party had been
used to gather there before they were finally purged. Goldstein himself,
it was said, had sometimes been seen there, years and decades ago. Syme's
fate was not difficult to foresee. And yet it was a fact that if Syme
grasped, even for three seconds, the nature of his, Winston's, secret
opinions, he would betray him instantly to the Thought Police. So would
anybody else, for that matter: but Syme more than most. Zeal was not
enough. Orthodoxy was unconsciousness.

Syme looked up. 'Here comes Parsons,' he said.

Something in the tone of his voice seemed to add, 'that bloody fool'.
Parsons, Winston's fellow-tenant at Victory Mansions, was in fact threading
his way across the room--a tubby, middle-sized man with fair hair and a
froglike face. At thirty-five he was already putting on rolls of fat at
neck and waistline, but his movements were brisk and boyish. His whole
appearance was that of a little boy grown large, so much so that although
he was wearing the regulation overalls, it was almost impossible not to
think of him as being dressed in the blue shorts, grey shirt, and red
neckerchief of the Spies. In visualizing him one saw always a picture of
dimpled knees and sleeves rolled back from pudgy forearms. Parsons did,
indeed, invariably revert to shorts when a community hike or any other
physical activity gave him an excuse for doing so. He greeted them both
with a cheery 'Hullo, hullo!' and sat down at the table, giving off an
intense smell of sweat. Beads of moisture stood out all over his pink face.
His powers of sweating were extraordinary. At the Community Centre you
could always tell when he had been playing table-tennis by the dampness of
the bat handle. Syme had produced a strip of paper on which there was a
long column of words, and was studying it with an ink-pencil between his
fingers.

'Look at him working away in the lunch hour,' said Parsons, nudging
Winston. 'Keenness, eh? What's that you've got there, old boy? Something
a bit too brainy for me, I expect. Smith, old boy, I'll tell you why I'm
chasing you. It's that sub you forgot to give me.'

'Which sub is that?' said Winston, automatically feeling for money. About
a quarter of one's salary had to be earmarked for voluntary subscriptions,
which were so numerous that it was difficult to keep track of them.

'For Hate Week. You know--the house-by-house fund. I'm treasurer for our
block. We're making an all-out effort--going to put on a tremendous show.
I tell you, it won't be my fault if old Victory Mansions doesn't have the
biggest outfit of flags in the whole street. Two dollars you promised me.'

Winston found and handed over two creased and filthy notes, which Parsons
entered in a small notebook, in the neat handwriting of the illiterate.

'By the way, old boy,' he said. 'I hear that little beggar of mine let fly
at you with his catapult yesterday. I gave him a good dressing-down for it.
In fact I told him I'd take the catapult away if he does it again.'

'I think he was a little upset at not going to the execution,' said
Winston.

'Ah, well--what I mean to say, shows the right spirit, doesn't it?
Mischievous little beggars they are, both of them, but talk about keenness!
All they think about is the Spies, and the war, of course. D'you know what
that little girl of mine did last Saturday, when her troop was on a hike
out Berkhamsted way? She got two other girls to go with her, slipped off
from the hike, and spent the whole afternoon following a strange man. They
kept on his tail for two hours, right through the woods, and then, when
they got into Amersham, handed him over to the patrols.'

'What did they do that for?' said Winston, somewhat taken aback. Parsons
went on triumphantly:

'My kid made sure he was some kind of enemy agent--might have been dropped
by parachute, for instance. But here's the point, old boy. What do you
think put her on to him in the first place? She spotted he was wearing a
funny kind of shoes--said she'd never seen anyone wearing shoes like that
before. So the chances were he was a foreigner. Pretty smart for a nipper
of seven, eh?'

'What happened to the man?' said Winston.

'Ah, that I couldn't say, of course. But I wouldn't be altogether surprised
if----' Parsons made the motion of aiming a rifle, and clicked his tongue
for the explosion.

'Good,' said Syme abstractedly, without looking up from his strip of paper.

'Of course we can't afford to take chances,' agreed Winston dutifully.

'What I mean to say, there is a war on,' said Parsons.

As though in confirmation of this, a trumpet call floated from the
telescreen just above their heads. However, it was not the proclamation of
a military victory this time, but merely an announcement from the Ministry
of Plenty.

'Comrades!' cried an eager youthful voice. 'Attention, comrades! We have
glorious news for you. We have won the battle for production! Returns now
completed of the output of all classes of consumption goods show that the
standard of living has risen by no less than 20 per cent over the past
year. All over Oceania this morning there were irrepressible spontaneous
demonstrations when workers marched out of factories and offices and
paraded through the streets with banners voicing their gratitude to Big
Brother for the new, happy life which his wise leadership has bestowed
upon us. Here are some of the completed figures. Foodstuffs----'

The phrase 'our new, happy life' recurred several times. It had been a
favourite of late with the Ministry of Plenty. Parsons, his attention
caught by the trumpet call, sat listening with a sort of gaping solemnity,
a sort of edified boredom. He could not follow the figures, but he was
aware that they were in some way a cause for satisfaction. He had lugged
out a huge and filthy pipe which was already half full of charred tobacco.
With the tobacco ration at 100 grammes a week it was seldom possible to
fill a pipe to the top. Winston was smoking a Victory Cigarette which he
held carefully horizontal. The new ration did not start till tomorrow and
he had only four cigarettes left. For the moment he had shut his ears to
the remoter noises and was listening to the stuff that streamed out of the
telescreen. It appeared that there had even been demonstrations to thank
Big Brother for raising the chocolate ration to twenty grammes a week. And
only yesterday, he reflected, it had been announced that the ration was
to be REDUCED to twenty grammes a week. Was it possible that they could
swallow that, after only twenty-four hours? Yes, they swallowed it. Parsons
swallowed it easily, with the stupidity of an animal. The eyeless creature
at the other table swallowed it fanatically, passionately, with a furious
desire to track down, denounce, and vaporize anyone who should suggest that
last week the ration had been thirty grammes. Syme, too--in some more
complex way, involving doublethink, Syme swallowed it. Was he, then, ALONE
in the possession of a memory?

The fabulous statistics continued to pour out of the telescreen. As
compared with last year there was more food, more clothes, more houses,
more furniture, more cooking-pots, more fuel, more ships, more helicopters,
more books, more babies--more of everything except disease, crime, and
insanity. Year by year and minute by minute, everybody and everything was
whizzing rapidly upwards. As Syme had done earlier Winston had taken up
his spoon and was dabbling in the pale-coloured gravy that dribbled across
the table, drawing a long streak of it out into a pattern. He meditated
resentfully on the physical texture of life. Had it always been like
this? Had food always tasted like this? He looked round the canteen.
A low-ceilinged, crowded room, its walls grimy from the contact of
innumerable bodies; battered metal tables and chairs, placed so close
together that you sat with elbows touching; bent spoons, dented trays,
coarse white mugs; all surfaces greasy, grime in every crack; and a
sourish, composite smell of bad gin and bad coffee and metallic stew and
dirty clothes. Always in your stomach and in your skin there was a sort
of protest, a feeling that you had been cheated of something that you had
a right to. It was true that he had no memories of anything greatly
different. In any time that he could accurately remember, there had never
been quite enough to eat, one had never had socks or underclothes that
were not full of holes, furniture had always been battered and rickety,
rooms underheated, tube trains crowded, houses falling to pieces,
bread dark-coloured, tea a rarity, coffee filthy-tasting, cigarettes
insufficient--nothing cheap and plentiful except synthetic gin. And though,
of course, it grew worse as one's body aged, was it not a sign that this
was NOT the natural order of things, if one's heart sickened at the
discomfort and dirt and scarcity, the interminable winters, the stickiness
of one's socks, the lifts that never worked, the cold water, the gritty
soap, the cigarettes that came to pieces, the food with its strange evil
tastes? Why should one feel it to be intolerable unless one had some kind
of ancestral memory that things had once been different?

He looked round the canteen again. Nearly everyone was ugly, and would
still have been ugly even if dressed otherwise than in the uniform blue
overalls. On the far side of the room, sitting at a table alone, a small,
curiously beetle-like man was drinking a cup of coffee, his little eyes
darting suspicious glances from side to side. How easy it was, thought
Winston, if you did not look about you, to believe that the physical type
set up by the Party as an ideal--tall muscular youths and deep-bosomed
maidens, blond-haired, vital, sunburnt, carefree--existed and even
predominated. Actually, so far as he could judge, the majority of people
in Airstrip One were small, dark, and ill-favoured. It was curious how that
beetle-like type proliferated in the Ministries: little dumpy men, growing
stout very early in life, with short legs, swift scuttling movements, and
fat inscrutable faces with very small eyes. It was the type that seemed to
flourish best under the dominion of the Party.

The announcement from the Ministry of Plenty ended on another trumpet call
and gave way to tinny music. Parsons, stirred to vague enthusiasm by the
bombardment of figures, took his pipe out of his mouth.

'The Ministry of Plenty's certainly done a good job this year,' he said
with a knowing shake of his head. 'By the way, Smith old boy, I suppose
you haven't got any razor blades you can let me have?'

'Not one,' said Winston. 'I've been using the same blade for six weeks
myself.'

'Ah, well--just thought I'd ask you, old boy.'

'Sorry,' said Winston.

The quacking voice from the next table, temporarily silenced during the
Ministry's announcement, had started up again, as loud as ever. For some
reason Winston suddenly found himself thinking of Mrs Parsons, with her
wispy hair and the dust in the creases of her face. Within two years those
children would be denouncing her to the Thought Police. Mrs Parsons would
be vaporized. Syme would be vaporized. Winston would be vaporized. O'Brien
would be vaporized. Parsons, on the other hand, would never be vaporized.
The eyeless creature with the quacking voice would never be vaporized.
The little beetle-like men who scuttle so nimbly through the labyrinthine
corridors of Ministries they, too, would never be vaporized. And the girl
with dark hair, the girl from the Fiction Department--she would never be
vaporized either. It seemed to him that he knew instinctively who would
survive and who would perish: though just what it was that made for
survival, it was not easy to say.

At this moment he was dragged out of his reverie with a violent jerk. The
girl at the next table had turned partly round and was looking at him. It
was the girl with dark hair. She was looking at him in a sidelong way, but
with curious intensity. The instant she caught his eye she looked away
again.

The sweat started out on Winston's backbone. A horrible pang of terror
went through him. It was gone almost at once, but it left a sort of nagging
uneasiness behind. Why was she watching him? Why did she keep following him
about? Unfortunately he could not remember whether she had already been at
the table when he arrived, or had come there afterwards. But yesterday, at
any rate, during the Two Minutes Hate, she had sat immediately behind him
when there was no apparent need to do so. Quite likely her real object had
been to listen to him and make sure whether he was shouting loudly enough.

His earlier thought returned to him: probably she was not actually a member
of the Thought Police, but then it was precisely the amateur spy who was
the greatest danger of all. He did not know how long she had been looking
at him, but perhaps for as much as five minutes, and it was possible
that his features had not been perfectly under control. It was terribly
dangerous to let your thoughts wander when you were in any public place
or within range of a telescreen. The smallest thing could give you away.
A nervous tic, an unconscious look of anxiety, a habit of muttering to
yourself--anything that carried with it the suggestion of abnormality, of
having something to hide. In any case, to wear an improper expression on
your face (to look incredulous when a victory was announced, for example)
was itself a punishable offence. There was even a word for it in Newspeak:
FACECRIME, it was called.

The girl had turned her back on him again. Perhaps after all she was not
really following him about, perhaps it was coincidence that she had sat so
close to him two days running. His cigarette had gone out, and he laid it
carefully on the edge of the table. He would finish smoking it after work,
if he could keep the tobacco in it. Quite likely the person at the next
table was a spy of the Thought Police, and quite likely he would be in the
cellars of the Ministry of Love within three days, but a cigarette end
must not be wasted. Syme had folded up his strip of paper and stowed it
away in his pocket. Parsons had begun talking again.

'Did I ever tell you, old boy,' he said, chuckling round the stem of his
pipe, 'about the time when those two nippers of mine set fire to the old
market-woman's skirt because they saw her wrapping up sausages in a poster
of B.B.? Sneaked up behind her and set fire to it with a box of matches.
Burned her quite badly, I believe. Little beggars, eh? But keen as mustard!
That's a first-rate training they give them in the Spies nowadays--better
than in my day, even. What d'you think's the latest thing they've served
them out with? Ear trumpets for listening through keyholes! My little
girl brought one home the other night--tried it out on our sitting-room
door, and reckoned she could hear twice as much as with her ear to the
hole. Of course it's only a toy, mind you. Still, gives 'em the right
idea, eh?'

At this moment the telescreen let out a piercing whistle. It was the
signal to return to work. All three men sprang to their feet to join in
the struggle round the lifts, and the remaining tobacco fell out of
Winston's cigarette.




Chapter 6



Winston was writing in his diary:


   It was three years ago. It was on a dark evening, in a narrow
side-street near one of the big railway stations. She was standing near a
doorway in the wall, under a street lamp that hardly gave any light. She
had a young face, painted very thick. It was really the paint that appealed
to me, the whiteness of it, like a mask, and the bright red lips. Party
women never paint their faces. There was nobody else in the street, and no
telescreens. She said two dollars. I----


For the moment it was too difficult to go on. He shut his eyes and pressed
his fingers against them, trying to squeeze out the vision that kept
recurring. He had an almost overwhelming temptation to shout a string of
filthy words at the top of his voice. Or to bang his head against the wall,
to kick over the table, and hurl the inkpot through the window--to do any
violent or noisy or painful thing that might black out the memory that was
tormenting him.

Your worst enemy, he reflected, was your own nervous system. At any moment
the tension inside you was liable to translate itself into some visible
symptom. He thought of a man whom he had passed in the street a few weeks
back; a quite ordinary-looking man, a Party member, aged thirty-five to
forty, tallish and thin, carrying a brief-case. They were a few metres
apart when the left side of the man's face was suddenly contorted by a sort
of spasm. It happened again just as they were passing one another: it was
only a twitch, a quiver, rapid as the clicking of a camera shutter, but
obviously habitual. He remembered thinking at the time: That poor devil is
done for. And what was frightening was that the action was quite possibly
unconscious. The most deadly danger of all was talking in your sleep. There
was no way of guarding against that, so far as he could see.

He drew his breath and went on writing:


   I went with her through the doorway and across a backyard into a
basement kitchen. There was a bed against the wall, and a lamp on the
table, turned down very low. She----


His teeth were set on edge. He would have liked to spit. Simultaneously
with the woman in the basement kitchen he thought of Katharine, his wife.
Winston was married--had been married, at any rate: probably he still was
married, so far as he knew his wife was not dead. He seemed to breathe
again the warm stuffy odour of the basement kitchen, an odour compounded
of bugs and dirty clothes and villainous cheap scent, but nevertheless
alluring, because no woman of the Party ever used scent, or could be
imagined as doing so. Only the proles used scent. In his mind the smell
of it was inextricably mixed up with fornication.

When he had gone with that woman it had been his first lapse in two years
or thereabouts. Consorting with prostitutes was forbidden, of course, but
it was one of those rules that you could occasionally nerve yourself to
break. It was dangerous, but it was not a life-and-death matter. To be
caught with a prostitute might mean five years in a forced-labour camp:
not more, if you had committed no other offence. And it was easy enough,
provided that you could avoid being caught in the act. The poorer quarters
swarmed with women who were ready to sell themselves. Some could even be
purchased for a bottle of gin, which the proles were not supposed to drink.
Tacitly the Party was even inclined to encourage prostitution, as an outlet
for instincts which could not be altogether suppressed. Mere debauchery
did not matter very much, so long as it was furtive and joyless and only
involved the women of a submerged and despised class. The unforgivable
crime was promiscuity between Party members. But--though this was one
of the crimes that the accused in the great purges invariably confessed
to--it was difficult to imagine any such thing actually happening.

The aim of the Party was not merely to prevent men and women from forming
loyalties which it might not be able to control. Its real, undeclared
purpose was to remove all pleasure from the sexual act. Not love so much
as eroticism was the enemy, inside marriage as well as outside it. All
marriages between Party members had to be approved by a committee
appointed for the purpose, and--though the principle was never clearly
stated--permission was always refused if the couple concerned gave
the impression of being physically attracted to one another. The only
recognized purpose of marriage was to beget children for the service of
the Party. Sexual intercourse was to be looked on as a slightly disgusting
minor operation, like having an enema. This again was never put into plain
words, but in an indirect way it was rubbed into every Party member from
childhood onwards. There were even organizations such as the Junior
Anti-Sex League, which advocated complete celibacy for both sexes. All
children were to be begotten by artificial insemination (ARTSEM, it was
called in Newspeak) and brought up in public institutions. This, Winston
was aware, was not meant altogether seriously, but somehow it fitted in
with the general ideology of the Party. The Party was trying to kill the
sex instinct, or, if it could not be killed, then to distort it and dirty
it. He did not know why this was so, but it seemed natural that it should
be so. And as far as the women were concerned, the Party's efforts were
largely successful.

He thought again of Katharine. It must be nine, ten--nearly eleven years
since they had parted. It was curious how seldom he thought of her. For
days at a time he was capable of forgetting that he had ever been married.
They had only been together for about fifteen months. The Party did not
permit divorce, but it rather encouraged separation in cases where there
were no children.

Katharine was a tall, fair-haired girl, very straight, with splendid
movements. She had a bold, aquiline face, a face that one might have called
noble until one discovered that there was as nearly as possible nothing
behind it. Very early in her married life he had decided--though perhaps
it was only that he knew her more intimately than he knew most people--that
she had without exception the most stupid, vulgar, empty mind that he had
ever encountered. She had not a thought in her head that was not a slogan,
and there was no imbecility, absolutely none that she was not capable of
swallowing if the Party handed it out to her. 'The human sound-track' he
nicknamed her in his own mind. Yet he could have endured living with her
if it had not been for just one thing--sex.

As soon as he touched her she seemed to wince and stiffen. To embrace her
was like embracing a jointed wooden image. And what was strange was that
even when she was clasping him against her he had the feeling that she
was simultaneously pushing him away with all her strength. The rigidity
of her muscles managed to convey that impression. She would lie there
with shut eyes, neither resisting nor co-operating but SUBMITTING. It was
extraordinarily embarrassing, and, after a while, horrible. But even then
he could have borne living with her if it had been agreed that they should
remain celibate. But curiously enough it was Katharine who refused this.
They must, she said, produce a child if they could. So the performance
continued to happen, once a week quite regularly, whenever it was not
impossible. She even used to remind him of it in the morning, as something
which had to be done that evening and which must not be forgotten. She had
two names for it. One was 'making a baby', and the other was 'our duty to
the Party' (yes, she had actually used that phrase). Quite soon he grew to
have a feeling of positive dread when the appointed day came round. But
luckily no child appeared, and in the end she agreed to give up trying,
and soon afterwards they parted.

Winston sighed inaudibly. He picked up his pen again and
wrote:


   She threw herself down on the bed, and at once, without any kind of
preliminary in the most coarse, horrible way you can imagine, pulled up
her skirt. I----


He saw himself standing there in the dim lamplight, with the smell of bugs
and cheap scent in his nostrils, and in his heart a feeling of defeat and
resentment which even at that moment was mixed up with the thought of
Katharine's white body, frozen for ever by the hypnotic power of the Party.
Why did it always have to be like this? Why could he not have a woman of
his own instead of these filthy scuffles at intervals of years? But a real
love affair was an almost unthinkable event. The women of the Party were
all alike. Chastity was as deep ingrained in them as Party loyalty. By
careful early conditioning, by games and cold water, by the rubbish that
was dinned into them at school and in the Spies and the Youth League, by
lectures, parades, songs, slogans, and martial music, the natural feeling
had been driven out of them. His reason told him that there must be
exceptions, but his heart did not believe it. They were all impregnable,
as the Party intended that they should be. And what he wanted, more even
than to be loved, was to break down that wall of virtue, even if it were
only once in his whole life. The sexual act, successfully performed, was
rebellion. Desire was thoughtcrime. Even to have awakened Katharine, if he
could have achieved it, would have been like a seduction, although she was
his wife.

But the rest of the story had got to be written down. He wrote:


   I turned up the lamp. When I saw her in the light----


After the darkness the feeble light of the paraffin lamp had seemed very
bright. For the first time he could see the woman properly. He had taken a
step towards her and then halted, full of lust and terror. He was painfully
conscious of the risk he had taken in coming here. It was perfectly
possible that the patrols would catch him on the way out: for that matter
they might be waiting outside the door at this moment. If he went away
without even doing what he had come here to do----!

It had got to be written down, it had got to be confessed. What he had
suddenly seen in the lamplight was that the woman was OLD. The paint was
plastered so thick on her face that it looked as though it might crack
like a cardboard mask. There were streaks of white in her hair; but the
truly dreadful detail was that her mouth had fallen a little open,
revealing nothing except a cavernous blackness. She had no teeth at all.

He wrote hurriedly, in scrabbling handwriting:


   When I saw her in the light she was quite an old woman, fifty years old
at least. But I went ahead and did it just the same.


He pressed his fingers against his eyelids again. He had written it down
at last, but it made no difference. The therapy had not worked. The urge
to shout filthy words at the top of his voice was as strong as ever.




Chapter 7



'If there is hope,' wrote Winston, 'it lies in the proles.'

If there was hope, it MUST lie in the proles, because only there in those
swarming disregarded masses, 85 per cent of the population of Oceania,
could the force to destroy the Party ever be generated. The Party could
not be overthrown from within. Its enemies, if it had any enemies, had
no way of coming together or even of identifying one another. Even if
the legendary Brotherhood existed, as just possibly it might, it was
inconceivable that its members could ever assemble in larger numbers than
twos and threes. Rebellion meant a look in the eyes, an inflexion of the
voice, at the most, an occasional whispered word. But the proles, if only
they could somehow become conscious of their own strength. would have no
need to conspire. They needed only to rise up and shake themselves like
a horse shaking off flies. If they chose they could blow the Party to
pieces tomorrow morning. Surely sooner or later it must occur to them to
do it? And yet----!

He remembered how once he had been walking down a crowded street when a
tremendous shout of hundreds of voices women's voices--had burst from a
side-street a little way ahead. It was a great formidable cry of anger
and despair, a deep, loud 'Oh-o-o-o-oh!' that went humming on like the
reverberation of a bell. His heart had leapt. It's started! he had thought.
A riot! The proles are breaking loose at last! When he had reached the spot
it was to see a mob of two or three hundred women crowding round the stalls
of a street market, with faces as tragic as though they had been the doomed
passengers on a sinking ship. But at this moment the general despair broke
down into a multitude of individual quarrels. It appeared that one of the
stalls had been selling tin saucepans. They were wretched, flimsy things,
but cooking-pots of any kind were always difficult to get. Now the supply
had unexpectedly given out. The successful women, bumped and jostled by
the rest, were trying to make off with their saucepans while dozens of
others clamoured round the stall, accusing the stall-keeper of favouritism
and of having more saucepans somewhere in reserve. There was a fresh
outburst of yells. Two bloated women, one of them with her hair coming
down, had got hold of the same saucepan and were trying to tear it out of
one another's hands. For a moment they were both tugging, and then the
handle came off. Winston watched them disgustedly. And yet, just for a
moment, what almost frightening power had sounded in that cry from only
a few hundred throats! Why was it that they could never shout like that
about anything that mattered?

He wrote:


   Until they become conscious they will never rebel, and until after they
have rebelled they cannot become conscious.


That, he reflected, might almost have been a transcription from one of the
Party textbooks. The Party claimed, of course, to have liberated the proles
from bondage. Before the Revolution they had been hideously oppressed by
the capitalists, they had been starved and flogged, women had been forced
to work in the coal mines (women still did work in the coal mines, as a
matter of fact), children had been sold into the factories at the age
of six. But simultaneously, true to the Principles of doublethink, the
Party taught that the proles were natural inferiors who must be kept in
subjection, like animals, by the application of a few simple rules. In
reality very little was known about the proles. It was not necessary to
know much. So long as they continued to work and breed, their other
activities were without importance. Left to themselves, like cattle turned
loose upon the plains of Argentina, they had reverted to a style of life
that appeared to be natural to them, a sort of ancestral pattern. They were
born, they grew up in the gutters, they went to work at twelve, they passed
through a brief blossoming-period of beauty and sexual desire, they married
at twenty, they were middle-aged at thirty, they died, for the most part,
at sixty. Heavy physical work, the care of home and children, petty
quarrels with neighbours, films, football, beer, and above all, gambling,
filled up the horizon of their minds. To keep them in control was not
difficult. A few agents of the Thought Police moved always among them,
spreading false rumours and marking down and eliminating the few
individuals who were judged capable of becoming dangerous; but no attempt
was made to indoctrinate them with the ideology of the Party. It was not
desirable that the proles should have strong political feelings. All that
was required of them was a primitive patriotism which could be appealed to
whenever it was necessary to make them accept longer working-hours or
shorter rations. And even when they became discontented, as they sometimes
did, their discontent led nowhere, because being without general ideas,
they could only focus it on petty specific grievances. The larger evils
invariably escaped their notice. The great majority of proles did not even
have telescreens in their homes. Even the civil police interfered with them
very little. There was a vast amount of criminality in London, a whole
world-within-a-world of thieves, bandits, prostitutes, drug-peddlers, and
racketeers of every description; but since it all happened among the proles
themselves, it was of no importance. In all questions of morals they were
allowed to follow their ancestral code. The sexual puritanism of the
Party was not imposed upon them. Promiscuity went unpunished, divorce
was permitted. For that matter, even religious worship would have been
permitted if the proles had shown any sign of needing or wanting it.
They were beneath suspicion. As the Party slogan put it: 'Proles and
animals are free.'

Winston reached down and cautiously scratched his varicose ulcer. It
had begun itching again. The thing you invariably came back to was the
impossibility of knowing what life before the Revolution had really been
like. He took out of the drawer a copy of a children's history textbook
which he had borrowed from Mrs Parsons, and began copying a passage into
the diary:


   In the old days (it ran), before the glorious Revolution, London was
not the beautiful city that we know today. It was a dark, dirty, miserable
place where hardly anybody had enough to eat and where hundreds and
thousands of poor people had no boots on their feet and not even a roof to
sleep under. Children no older than you had to work twelve hours a day for
cruel masters who flogged them with whips if they worked too slowly and
fed them on nothing but stale breadcrusts and water. But in among all
this terrible poverty there were just a few great big beautiful houses
that were lived in by rich men who had as many as thirty servants to look
after them. These rich men were called capitalists. They were fat, ugly
men with wicked faces, like the one in the picture on the opposite page.
You can see that he is dressed in a long black coat which was called a
frock coat, and a queer, shiny hat shaped like a stovepipe, which was
called a top hat. This was the uniform of the capitalists, and no one else
was allowed to wear it. The capitalists owned everything in the world, and
everyone else was their slave. They owned all the land, all the houses,
all the factories, and all the money. If anyone disobeyed them they could
throw them into prison, or they could take his job away and starve him to
death. When any ordinary person spoke to a capitalist he had to cringe and
bow to him, and take off his cap and address him as 'Sir'. The chief of
all the capitalists was called the King, and----


But he knew the rest of the catalogue. There would be mention of the
bishops in their lawn sleeves, the judges in their ermine robes, the
pillory, the stocks, the treadmill, the cat-o'-nine tails, the Lord Mayor's
Banquet, and the practice of kissing the Pope's toe. There was also
something called the JUS PRIMAE NOCTIS, which would probably not be
mentioned in a textbook for children. It was the law by which every
capitalist had the right to sleep with any woman working in one of his
factories.

How could you tell how much of it was lies? It MIGHT be true that the
average human being was better off now than he had been before the
Revolution. The only evidence to the contrary was the mute protest in your
own bones, the instinctive feeling that the conditions you lived in were
intolerable and that at some other time they must have been different. It
struck him that the truly characteristic thing about modern life was not
its cruelty and insecurity, but simply its bareness, its dinginess, its
listlessness. Life, if you looked about you, bore no resemblance not only
to the lies that streamed out of the telescreens, but even to the ideals
that the Party was trying to achieve. Great areas of it, even for a Party
member, were neutral and non-political, a matter of slogging through dreary
jobs, fighting for a place on the Tube, darning a worn-out sock, cadging
a saccharine tablet, saving a cigarette end. The ideal set up by the
Party was something huge, terrible, and glittering--a world of steel
and concrete, of monstrous machines and terrifying weapons--a nation of
warriors and fanatics, marching forward in perfect unity, all thinking the
same thoughts and shouting the same slogans, perpetually working, fighting,
triumphing, persecuting--three hundred million people all with the same
face. The reality was decaying, dingy cities where underfed people shuffled
to and fro in leaky shoes, in patched-up nineteenth-century houses that
smelt always of cabbage and bad lavatories. He seemed to see a vision of
London, vast and ruinous, city of a million dustbins, and mixed up with it
was a picture of Mrs Parsons, a woman with lined face and wispy hair,
fiddling helplessly with a blocked waste-pipe.

He reached down and scratched his ankle again. Day and night the
telescreens bruised your ears with statistics proving that people today
had more food, more clothes, better houses, better recreations--that they
lived longer, worked shorter hours, were bigger, healthier, stronger,
happier, more intelligent, better educated, than the people of fifty years
ago. Not a word of it could ever be proved or disproved. The Party claimed,
for example, that today 40 per cent of adult proles were literate: before
the Revolution, it was said, the number had only been 15 per cent. The
Party claimed that the infant mortality rate was now only 160 per
thousand, whereas before the Revolution it had been 300--and so it went
on. It was like a single equation with two unknowns. It might very well be
that literally every word in the history books, even the things that one
accepted without question, was pure fantasy. For all he knew there might
never have been any such law as the JUS PRIMAE NOCTIS, or any such creature
as a capitalist, or any such garment as a top hat.

Everything faded into mist. The past was erased, the erasure was forgotten,
the lie became truth. Just once in his life he had possessed--AFTER the
event: that was what counted--concrete, unmistakable evidence of an act of
falsification. He had held it between his fingers for as long as thirty
seconds. In 1973, it must have been--at any rate, it was at about the time
when he and Katharine had parted. But the really relevant date was seven
or eight years earlier.

The story really began in the middle sixties, the period of the great
purges in which the original leaders of the Revolution were wiped out
once and for all. By 1970 none of them was left, except Big Brother
himself. All the rest had by that time been exposed as traitors and
counter-revolutionaries. Goldstein had fled and was hiding no one knew
where, and of the others, a few had simply disappeared, while the majority
had been executed after spectacular public trials at which they made
confession of their crimes. Among the last survivors were three men named
Jones, Aaronson, and Rutherford. It must have been in 1965 that these three
had been arrested. As often happened, they had vanished for a year or more,
so that one did not know whether they were alive or dead, and then had
suddenly been brought forth to incriminate themselves in the usual way.
They had confessed to intelligence with the enemy (at that date, too, the
enemy was Eurasia), embezzlement of public funds, the murder of various
trusted Party members, intrigues against the leadership of Big Brother
which had started long before the Revolution happened, and acts of sabotage
causing the death of hundreds of thousands of people. After confessing to
these things they had been pardoned, reinstated in the Party, and given
posts which were in fact sinecures but which sounded important. All three
had written long, abject articles in 'The Times', analysing the reasons
for their defection and promising to make amends.

Some time after their release Winston had actually seen all three of them
in the Chestnut Tree Cafe. He remembered the sort of terrified fascination
with which he had watched them out of the corner of his eye. They were men
far older than himself, relics of the ancient world, almost the last great
figures left over from the heroic days of the Party. The glamour of the
underground struggle and the civil war still faintly clung to them. He had
the feeling, though already at that time facts and dates were growing
blurry, that he had known their names years earlier than he had known that
of Big Brother. But also they were outlaws, enemies, untouchables, doomed
with absolute certainty to extinction within a year or two. No one who had
once fallen into the hands of the Thought Police ever escaped in the end.
They were corpses waiting to be sent back to the grave.

There was no one at any of the tables nearest to them. It was not wise
even to be seen in the neighbourhood of such people. They were sitting
in silence before glasses of the gin flavoured with cloves which was the
speciality of the cafe. Of the three, it was Rutherford whose appearance
had most impressed Winston. Rutherford had once been a famous caricaturist,
whose brutal cartoons had helped to inflame popular opinion before and
during the Revolution. Even now, at long intervals, his cartoons were
appearing in The Times. They were simply an imitation of his earlier
manner, and curiously lifeless and unconvincing. Always they were a
rehashing of the ancient themes--slum tenements, starving children, street
battles, capitalists in top hats--even on the barricades the capitalists
still seemed to cling to their top hats an endless, hopeless effort to
get back into the past. He was a monstrous man, with a mane of greasy
grey hair, his face pouched and seamed, with thick negroid lips. At one
time he must have been immensely strong; now his great body was sagging,
sloping, bulging, falling away in every direction. He seemed to be breaking
up before one's eyes, like a mountain crumbling.

It was the lonely hour of fifteen. Winston could not now remember how he
had come to be in the cafe at such a time. The place was almost empty. A
tinny music was trickling from the telescreens. The three men sat in their
corner almost motionless, never speaking. Uncommanded, the waiter brought
fresh glasses of gin. There was a chessboard on the table beside them, with
the pieces set out but no game started. And then, for perhaps half a minute
in all, something happened to the telescreens. The tune that they were
playing changed, and the tone of the music changed too. There came into
it--but it was something hard to describe. It was a peculiar, cracked,
braying, jeering note: in his mind Winston called it a yellow note. And
then a voice from the telescreen was singing:


  Under the spreading chestnut tree
  I sold you and you sold me:
  There lie they, and here lie we
  Under the spreading chestnut tree.


The three men never stirred. But when Winston glanced again at Rutherford's
ruinous face, he saw that his eyes were full of tears. And for the first
time he noticed, with a kind of inward shudder, and yet not knowing
AT WHAT he shuddered, that both Aaronson and Rutherford had broken noses.

A little later all three were re-arrested. It appeared that they had
engaged in fresh conspiracies from the very moment of their release. At
their second trial they confessed to all their old crimes over again, with
a whole string of new ones. They were executed, and their fate was recorded
in the Party histories, a warning to posterity. About five years after
this, in 1973, Winston was unrolling a wad of documents which had just
flopped out of the pneumatic tube on to his desk when he came on a fragment
of paper which had evidently been slipped in among the others and then
forgotten. The instant he had flattened it out he saw its significance.
It was a half-page torn out of 'The Times' of about ten years earlier--the
top half of the page, so that it included the date--and it contained a
photograph of the delegates at some Party function in New York. Prominent
in the middle of the group were Jones, Aaronson, and Rutherford. There was
no mistaking them, in any case their names were in the caption at the
bottom.

The point was that at both trials all three men had confessed that on that
date they had been on Eurasian soil. They had flown from a secret airfield
in Canada to a rendezvous somewhere in Siberia, and had conferred with
members of the Eurasian General Staff, to whom they had betrayed important
military secrets. The date had stuck in Winston's memory because it chanced
to be midsummer day; but the whole story must be on record in countless
other places as well. There was only one possible conclusion: the
confessions were lies.

Of course, this was not in itself a discovery. Even at that time Winston
had not imagined that the people who were wiped out in the purges had
actually committed the crimes that they were accused of. But this was
concrete evidence; it was a fragment of the abolished past, like a fossil
bone which turns up in the wrong stratum and destroys a geological theory.
It was enough to blow the Party to atoms, if in some way it could have
been published to the world and its significance made known.

He had gone straight on working. As soon as he saw what the photograph
was, and what it meant, he had covered it up with another sheet of paper.
Luckily, when he unrolled it, it had been upside-down from the point of
view of the telescreen.

He took his scribbling pad on his knee and pushed back his chair so as
to get as far away from the telescreen as possible. To keep your face
expressionless was not difficult, and even your breathing could be
controlled, with an effort: but you could not control the beating of your
heart, and the telescreen was quite delicate enough to pick it up. He let
what he judged to be ten minutes go by, tormented all the while by the
fear that some accident--a sudden draught blowing across his desk, for
instance--would betray him. Then, without uncovering it again, he dropped
the photograph into the memory hole, along with some other waste papers.
Within another minute, perhaps, it would have crumbled into ashes.

That was ten--eleven years ago. Today, probably, he would have kept that
photograph. It was curious that the fact of having held it in his fingers
seemed to him to make a difference even now, when the photograph itself,
as well as the event it recorded, was only memory. Was the Party's hold
upon the past less strong, he wondered, because a piece of evidence which
existed no longer HAD ONCE existed?

But today, supposing that it could be somehow resurrected from its ashes,
the photograph might not even be evidence. Already, at the time when he
made his discovery, Oceania was no longer at war with Eurasia, and it must
have been to the agents of Eastasia that the three dead men had betrayed
their country. Since then there had been other changes--two, three,
he could not remember how many. Very likely the confessions had been
rewritten and rewritten until the original facts and dates no longer
had the smallest significance. The past not only changed, but changed
continuously. What most afflicted him with the sense of nightmare was that
he had never clearly understood why the huge imposture was undertaken.
The immediate advantages of falsifying the past were obvious, but the
ultimate motive was mysterious. He took up his pen again and wrote:


   I understand HOW: I do not understand WHY.


He wondered, as he had many times wondered before, whether he himself was
a lunatic. Perhaps a lunatic was simply a minority of one. At one time it
had been a sign of madness to believe that the earth goes round the sun;
today, to believe that the past is unalterable. He might be ALONE in
holding that belief, and if alone, then a lunatic. But the thought of being
a lunatic did not greatly trouble him: the horror was that he might also
be wrong.

He picked up the children's history book and looked at the portrait of
Big Brother which formed its frontispiece. The hypnotic eyes gazed into
his own. It was as though some huge force were pressing down upon
you--something that penetrated inside your skull, battering against your
brain, frightening you out of your beliefs, persuading you, almost, to
deny the evidence of your senses. In the end the Party would announce that
two and two made five, and you would have to believe it. It was inevitable
that they should make that claim sooner or later: the logic of their
position demanded it. Not merely the validity of experience, but the very
existence of external reality, was tacitly denied by their philosophy. The
heresy of heresies was common sense. And what was terrifying was not that
they would kill you for thinking otherwise, but that they might be right.
For, after all, how do we know that two and two make four? Or that the
force of gravity works? Or that the past is unchangeable? If both the past
and the external world exist only in the mind, and if the mind itself is
controllable what then?

But no! His courage seemed suddenly to stiffen of its own accord. The face
of O'Brien, not called up by any obvious association, had floated into his
mind. He knew, with more certainty than before, that O'Brien was on his
side. He was writing the diary for O'Brien--TO O'Brien: it was like an
interminable letter which no one would ever read, but which was addressed
to a particular person and took its colour from that fact.

The Party told you to reject the evidence of your eyes and ears. It was
their final, most essential command. His heart sank as he thought of
the enormous power arrayed against him, the ease with which any Party
intellectual would overthrow him in debate, the subtle arguments which he
would not be able to understand, much less answer. And yet he was in the
right! They were wrong and he was right. The obvious, the silly, and the
true had got to be defended. Truisms are true, hold on to that! The solid
world exists, its laws do not change. Stones are hard, water is wet,
objects unsupported fall towards the earth's centre. With the feeling that
he was speaking to O'Brien, and also that he was setting forth an important
axiom, he wrote:


   Freedom is the freedom to say that two plus two make four. If that is
granted, all else follows.




Chapter 8



From somewhere at the bottom of a passage the smell of roasting
coffee--real coffee, not Victory Coffee--came floating out into the street.
Winston paused involuntarily. For perhaps two seconds he was back in the
half-forgotten world of his childhood. Then a door banged, seeming to cut
off the smell as abruptly as though it had been a sound.

He had walked several kilometres over pavements, and his varicose ulcer
was throbbing. This was the second time in three weeks that he had missed
an evening at the Community Centre: a rash act, since you could be certain
that the number of your attendances at the Centre was carefully checked.
In principle a Party member had no spare time, and was never alone except
in bed. It was assumed that when he was not working, eating, or sleeping
he would be taking part in some kind of communal recreation: to do anything
that suggested a taste for solitude, even to go for a walk by yourself,
was always slightly dangerous. There was a word for it in Newspeak:
OWNLIFE, it was called, meaning individualism and eccentricity. But this
evening as he came out of the Ministry the balminess of the April air had
tempted him. The sky was a warmer blue than he had seen it that year, and
suddenly the long, noisy evening at the Centre, the boring, exhausting
games, the lectures, the creaking camaraderie oiled by gin, had seemed
intolerable. On impulse he had turned away from the bus-stop and wandered
off into the labyrinth of London, first south, then east, then north again,
losing himself among unknown streets and hardly bothering in which
direction he was going.

'If there is hope,' he had written in the diary, 'it lies in the proles.'
The words kept coming back to him, statement of a mystical truth and a
palpable absurdity. He was somewhere in the vague, brown-coloured slums
to the north and east of what had once been Saint Pancras Station. He was
walking up a cobbled street of little two-storey houses with battered
doorways which gave straight on the pavement and which were somehow
curiously suggestive of ratholes. There were puddles of filthy water here
and there among the cobbles. In and out of the dark doorways, and down
narrow alley-ways that branched off on either side, people swarmed in
astonishing numbers--girls in full bloom, with crudely lipsticked mouths,
and youths who chased the girls, and swollen waddling women who showed you
what the girls would be like in ten years' time, and old bent creatures
shuffling along on splayed feet, and ragged barefooted children who played
in the puddles and then scattered at angry yells from their mothers.
Perhaps a quarter of the windows in the street were broken and boarded up.
Most of the people paid no attention to Winston; a few eyed him with a
sort of guarded curiosity. Two monstrous women with brick-red forearms
folded across their aprons were talking outside a doorway. Winston caught
scraps of conversation as he approached.

'"Yes," I says to 'er, "that's all very well," I says. "But if you'd of
been in my place you'd of done the same as what I done. It's easy to
criticize," I says, "but you ain't got the same problems as what I got."'

'Ah,' said the other, 'that's jest it. That's jest where it is.'

The strident voices stopped abruptly. The women studied him in hostile
silence as he went past. But it was not hostility, exactly; merely a kind
of wariness, a momentary stiffening, as at the passing of some unfamiliar
animal. The blue overalls of the Party could not be a common sight in a
street like this. Indeed, it was unwise to be seen in such places, unless
you had definite business there. The patrols might stop you if you happened
to run into them. 'May I see your papers, comrade? What are you doing here?
What time did you leave work? Is this your usual way home?'--and so on and
so forth. Not that there was any rule against walking home by an unusual
route: but it was enough to draw attention to you if the Thought Police
heard about it.

Suddenly the whole street was in commotion. There were yells of warning
from all sides. People were shooting into the doorways like rabbits. A
young woman leapt out of a doorway a little ahead of Winston, grabbed up a
tiny child playing in a puddle, whipped her apron round it, and leapt back
again, all in one movement. At the same instant a man in a concertina-like
black suit, who had emerged from a side alley, ran towards Winston,
pointing excitedly to the sky.

'Steamer!' he yelled. 'Look out, guv'nor! Bang over'ead! Lay down quick!'

'Steamer' was a nickname which, for some reason, the proles applied to
rocket bombs. Winston promptly flung himself on his face. The proles were
nearly always right when they gave you a warning of this kind. They seemed
to possess some kind of instinct which told them several seconds in advance
when a rocket was coming, although the rockets supposedly travelled faster
than sound. Winston clasped his forearms above his head. There was a roar
that seemed to make the pavement heave; a shower of light objects pattered
on to his back. When he stood up he found that he was covered with
fragments of glass from the nearest window.

He walked on. The bomb had demolished a group of houses 200 metres up the
street. A black plume of smoke hung in the sky, and below it a cloud of
plaster dust in which a crowd was already forming around the ruins. There
was a little pile of plaster lying on the pavement ahead of him, and in
the middle of it he could see a bright red streak. When he got up to it he
saw that it was a human hand severed at the wrist. Apart from the bloody
stump, the hand was so completely whitened as to resemble a plaster cast.

He kicked the thing into the gutter, and then, to avoid the crowd, turned
down a side-street to the right. Within three or four minutes he was out
of the area which the bomb had affected, and the sordid swarming life of
the streets was going on as though nothing had happened. It was nearly
twenty hours, and the drinking-shops which the proles frequented ('pubs',
they called them) were choked with customers. From their grimy swing doors,
endlessly opening and shutting, there came forth a smell of urine, sawdust,
and sour beer. In an angle formed by a projecting house-front three men
were standing very close together, the middle one of them holding a
folded-up newspaper which the other two were studying over his shoulder.
Even before he was near enough to make out the expression on their faces,
Winston could see absorption in every line of their bodies. It was
obviously some serious piece of news that they were reading. He was a few
paces away from them when suddenly the group broke up and two of the men
were in violent altercation. For a moment they seemed almost on the point
of blows.

'Can't you bleeding well listen to what I say? I tell you no number ending
in seven ain't won for over fourteen months!'

'Yes, it 'as, then!'

'No, it 'as not! Back 'ome I got the 'ole lot of 'em for over two years
wrote down on a piece of paper. I takes 'em down reg'lar as the clock. An'
I tell you, no number ending in seven----'

'Yes, a seven 'AS won! I could pretty near tell you the bleeding number.
Four oh seven, it ended in. It were in February--second week in February.'

'February your grandmother! I got it all down in black and white. An' I
tell you, no number----'

'Oh, pack it in!' said the third man.

They were talking about the Lottery. Winston looked back when he had gone
thirty metres. They were still arguing, with vivid, passionate faces.
The Lottery, with its weekly pay-out of enormous prizes, was the one public
event to which the proles paid serious attention. It was probable that
there were some millions of proles for whom the Lottery was the principal
if not the only reason for remaining alive. It was their delight, their
folly, their anodyne, their intellectual stimulant. Where the Lottery was
concerned, even people who could barely read and write seemed capable of
intricate calculations and staggering feats of memory. There was a whole
tribe of men who made a living simply by selling systems, forecasts, and
lucky amulets. Winston had nothing to do with the running of the Lottery,
which was managed by the Ministry of Plenty, but he was aware (indeed
everyone in the party was aware) that the prizes were largely imaginary.
Only small sums were actually paid out, the winners of the big prizes being
non-existent persons. In the absence of any real intercommunication between
one part of Oceania and another, this was not difficult to arrange.

But if there was hope, it lay in the proles. You had to cling on to that.
When you put it in words it sounded reasonable: it was when you looked at
the human beings passing you on the pavement that it became an act of
faith. The street into which he had turned ran downhill. He had a feeling
that he had been in this neighbourhood before, and that there was a main
thoroughfare not far away. From somewhere ahead there came a din of
shouting voices. The street took a sharp turn and then ended in a flight
of steps which led down into a sunken alley where a few stall-keepers
were selling tired-looking vegetables. At this moment Winston remembered
where he was. The alley led out into the main street, and down the next
turning, not five minutes away, was the junk-shop where he had bought the
blank book which was now his diary. And in a small stationer's shop not
far away he had bought his penholder and his bottle of ink.

He paused for a moment at the top of the steps. On the opposite side of
the alley there was a dingy little pub whose windows appeared to be frosted
over but in reality were merely coated with dust. A very old man, bent but
active, with white moustaches that bristled forward like those of a prawn,
pushed open the swing door and went in. As Winston stood watching, it
occurred to him that the old man, who must be eighty at the least, had
already been middle-aged when the Revolution happened. He and a few others
like him were the last links that now existed with the vanished world of
capitalism. In the Party itself there were not many people left whose ideas
had been formed before the Revolution. The older generation had mostly
been wiped out in the great purges of the fifties and sixties, and the few
who survived had long ago been terrified into complete intellectual
surrender. If there was any one still alive who could give you a truthful
account of conditions in the early part of the century, it could only be a
prole. Suddenly the passage from the history book that he had copied into
his diary came back into Winston's mind, and a lunatic impulse took hold
of him. He would go into the pub, he would scrape acquaintance with that
old man and question him. He would say to him: 'Tell me about your life
when you were a boy. What was it like in those days? Were things better
than they are now, or were they worse?'

Hurriedly, lest he should have time to become frightened, he descended the
steps and crossed the narrow street. It was madness of course. As usual,
there was no definite rule against talking to proles and frequenting their
pubs, but it was far too unusual an action to pass unnoticed. If the
patrols appeared he might plead an attack of faintness, but it was not
likely that they would believe him. He pushed open the door, and a hideous
cheesy smell of sour beer hit him in the face. As he entered the din of
voices dropped to about half its volume. Behind his back he could feel
everyone eyeing his blue overalls. A game of darts which was going on at
the other end of the room interrupted itself for perhaps as much as thirty
seconds. The old man whom he had followed was standing at the bar, having
some kind of altercation with the barman, a large, stout, hook-nosed young
man with enormous forearms. A knot of others, standing round with glasses
in their hands, were watching the scene.

'I arst you civil enough, didn't I?' said the old man, straightening his
shoulders pugnaciously. 'You telling me you ain't got a pint mug in the
'ole bleeding boozer?'

'And what in hell's name IS a pint?' said the barman, leaning forward with
the tips of his fingers on the counter.

''Ark at 'im! Calls 'isself a barman and don't know what a pint is! Why,
a pint's the 'alf of a quart, and there's four quarts to the gallon.
'Ave to teach you the A, B, C next.'

'Never heard of 'em,' said the barman shortly. 'Litre and half
litre--that's all we serve. There's the glasses on the shelf in front
of you.'

'I likes a pint,' persisted the old man. 'You could 'a drawed me off a pint
easy enough. We didn't 'ave these bleeding litres when I was a young man.'

'When you were a young man we were all living in the treetops,' said the
barman, with a glance at the other customers.

There was a shout of laughter, and the uneasiness caused by Winston's entry
seemed to disappear. The old man's white-stubbled face had flushed pink. He
turned away, muttering to himself, and bumped into Winston. Winston caught
him gently by the arm.

'May I offer you a drink?' he said.

'You're a gent,' said the other, straightening his shoulders again. He
appeared not to have noticed Winston's blue overalls. 'Pint!' he added
aggressively to the barman. 'Pint of wallop.'

The barman swished two half-litres of dark-brown beer into thick glasses
which he had rinsed in a bucket under the counter. Beer was the only drink
you could get in prole pubs. The proles were supposed not to drink gin,
though in practice they could get hold of it easily enough. The game of
darts was in full swing again, and the knot of men at the bar had begun
talking about lottery tickets. Winston's presence was forgotten for a
moment. There was a deal table under the window where he and the old man
could talk without fear of being overheard. It was horribly dangerous, but
at any rate there was no telescreen in the room, a point he had made sure
of as soon as he came in.

''E could 'a drawed me off a pint,' grumbled the old man as he settled down
behind a glass. 'A 'alf litre ain't enough. It don't satisfy. And a 'ole
litre's too much. It starts my bladder running. Let alone the price.'

'You must have seen great changes since you were a young man,' said
Winston tentatively.

The old man's pale blue eyes moved from the darts board to the bar, and
from the bar to the door of the Gents, as though it were in the bar-room
that he expected the changes to have occurred.

'The beer was better,' he said finally. 'And cheaper! When I was a young
man, mild beer--wallop we used to call it--was fourpence a pint. That was
before the war, of course.'

'Which war was that?' said Winston.

'It's all wars,' said the old man vaguely. He took up his glass, and his
shoulders straightened again. ''Ere's wishing you the very best of 'ealth!'

In his lean throat the sharp-pointed Adam's apple made a surprisingly rapid
up-and-down movement, and the beer vanished. Winston went to the bar and
came back with two more half-litres. The old man appeared to have forgotten
his prejudice against drinking a full litre.

'You are very much older than I am,' said Winston. 'You must have been a
grown man before I was born. You can remember what it was like in the old
days, before the Revolution. People of my age don't really know anything
about those times. We can only read about them in books, and what it says
in the books may not be true. I should like your opinion on that. The
history books say that life before the Revolution was completely different
from what it is now. There was the most terrible oppression, injustice,
poverty worse than anything we can imagine. Here in London, the great mass
of the people never had enough to eat from birth to death. Half of them
hadn't even boots on their feet. They worked twelve hours a day, they left
school at nine, they slept ten in a room. And at the same time there were
a very few people, only a few thousands--the capitalists, they were
called--who were rich and powerful. They owned everything that there was
to own. They lived in great gorgeous houses with thirty servants, they
rode about in motor-cars and four-horse carriages, they drank champagne,
they wore top hats----'

The old man brightened suddenly.

'Top 'ats!' he said. 'Funny you should mention 'em. The same thing come
into my 'ead only yesterday, I dono why. I was jest thinking, I ain't seen
a top 'at in years. Gorn right out, they 'ave. The last time I wore one
was at my sister-in-law's funeral. And that was--well, I couldn't give you
the date, but it must'a been fifty years ago. Of course it was only 'ired
for the occasion, you understand.'

'It isn't very important about the top hats,' said Winston patiently.
'The point is, these capitalists--they and a few lawyers and priests and
so forth who lived on them--were the lords of the earth. Everything existed
for their benefit. You--the ordinary people, the workers--were their
slaves. They could do what they liked with you. They could ship you off to
Canada like cattle. They could sleep with your daughters if they chose.
They could order you to be flogged with something called a cat-o'-nine
tails. You had to take your cap off when you passed them. Every capitalist
went about with a gang of lackeys who----'

The old man brightened again.

'Lackeys!' he said. 'Now there's a word I ain't 'eard since ever so long.
Lackeys! That reg'lar takes me back, that does. I recollect--oh, donkey's
years ago--I used to sometimes go to 'Yde Park of a Sunday afternoon to
'ear the blokes making speeches. Salvation Army, Roman Catholics, Jews,
Indians--all sorts there was. And there was one bloke--well, I couldn't
give you 'is name, but a real powerful speaker 'e was. 'E didn't 'alf
give it 'em! "Lackeys!" 'e says, "lackeys of the bourgeoisie! Flunkies of
the ruling class!" Parasites--that was another of them. And 'yenas--'e
definitely called 'em 'yenas. Of course 'e was referring to the Labour
Party, you understand.'

Winston had the feeling that they were talking at cross-purposes.

'What I really wanted to know was this,' he said. 'Do you feel that you
have more freedom now than you had in those days? Are you treated more
like a human being? In the old days, the rich people, the people at the
top----'

'The 'Ouse of Lords,' put in the old man reminiscently.

'The House of Lords, if you like. What I am asking is, were these people
able to treat you as an inferior, simply because they were rich and you
were poor? Is it a fact, for instance, that you had to call them "Sir" and
take off your cap when you passed them?'

The old man appeared to think deeply. He drank off about a quarter of his
beer before answering.

'Yes,' he said. 'They liked you to touch your cap to 'em. It showed
respect, like. I didn't agree with it, myself, but I done it often enough.
Had to, as you might say.'

'And was it usual--I'm only quoting what I've read in history books--was
it usual for these people and their servants to push you off the pavement
into the gutter?'

'One of 'em pushed me once,' said the old man. 'I recollect it as if it
was yesterday. It was Boat Race night--terribly rowdy they used to get on
Boat Race night--and I bumps into a young bloke on Shaftesbury Avenue.
Quite a gent, 'e was--dress shirt, top 'at, black overcoat. 'E was kind
of zig-zagging across the pavement, and I bumps into 'im accidental-like.
'E says, "Why can't you look where you're going?" 'e says. I say, "Ju think
you've bought the bleeding pavement?" 'E says, "I'll twist your bloody 'ead
off if you get fresh with me." I says, "You're drunk. I'll give you in
charge in 'alf a minute," I says. An' if you'll believe me, 'e puts 'is
'and on my chest and gives me a shove as pretty near sent me under the
wheels of a bus. Well, I was young in them days, and I was going to 'ave
fetched 'im one, only----'

A sense of helplessness took hold of Winston. The old man's memory was
nothing but a rubbish-heap of details. One could question him all day
without getting any real information. The party histories might still be
true, after a fashion: they might even be completely true. He made a last
attempt.

'Perhaps I have not made myself clear,' he said. 'What I'm trying to say
is this. You have been alive a very long time; you lived half your life
before the Revolution. In 1925, for instance, you were already grown up.
Would you say from what you can remember, that life in 1925 was better
than it is now, or worse? If you could choose, would you prefer to live
then or now?'

The old man looked meditatively at the darts board. He finished up his
beer, more slowly than before. When he spoke it was with a tolerant
philosophical air, as though the beer had mellowed him.

'I know what you expect me to say,' he said. 'You expect me to say as I'd
sooner be young again. Most people'd say they'd sooner be young, if you
arst 'em. You got your 'ealth and strength when you're young. When you
get to my time of life you ain't never well. I suffer something wicked
from my feet, and my bladder's jest terrible. Six and seven times a night
it 'as me out of bed. On the other 'and, there's great advantages in being
a old man. You ain't got the same worries. No truck with women, and that's
a great thing. I ain't 'ad a woman for near on thirty year, if you'd
credit it. Nor wanted to, what's more.'

Winston sat back against the window-sill. It was no use going on. He was
about to buy some more beer when the old man suddenly got up and shuffled
rapidly into the stinking urinal at the side of the room. The extra
half-litre was already working on him. Winston sat for a minute or two
gazing at his empty glass, and hardly noticed when his feet carried him out
into the street again. Within twenty years at the most, he reflected, the
huge and simple question, 'Was life better before the Revolution than it
is now?' would have ceased once and for all to be answerable. But in effect
it was unanswerable even now, since the few scattered survivors from the
ancient world were incapable of comparing one age with another. They
remembered a million useless things, a quarrel with a workmate, a hunt for
a lost bicycle pump, the expression on a long-dead sister's face, the
swirls of dust on a windy morning seventy years ago: but all the relevant
facts were outside the range of their vision. They were like the ant,
which can see small objects but not large ones. And when memory failed and
written records were falsified--when that happened, the claim of the Party
to have improved the conditions of human life had got to be accepted,
because there did not exist, and never again could exist, any standard
against which it could be tested.

At this moment his train of thought stopped abruptly. He halted and looked
up. He was in a narrow street, with a few dark little shops, interspersed
among dwelling-houses. Immediately above his head there hung three
discoloured metal balls which looked as if they had once been gilded. He
seemed to know the place. Of course! He was standing outside the junk-shop
where he had bought the diary.

A twinge of fear went through him. It had been a sufficiently rash act to
buy the book in the beginning, and he had sworn never to come near the
place again. And yet the instant that he allowed his thoughts to wander,
his feet had brought him back here of their own accord. It was precisely
against suicidal impulses of this kind that he had hoped to guard himself
by opening the diary. At the same time he noticed that although it was
nearly twenty-one hours the shop was still open. With the feeling that he
would be less conspicuous inside than hanging about on the pavement, he
stepped through the doorway. If questioned, he could plausibly say that
he was trying to buy razor blades.

The proprietor had just lighted a hanging oil lamp which gave off an
unclean but friendly smell. He was a man of perhaps sixty, frail and
bowed, with a long, benevolent nose, and mild eyes distorted by thick
spectacles. His hair was almost white, but his eyebrows were bushy and
still black. His spectacles, his gentle, fussy movements, and the fact
that he was wearing an aged jacket of black velvet, gave him a vague air
of intellectuality, as though he had been some kind of literary man, or
perhaps a musician. His voice was soft, as though faded, and his accent
less debased than that of the majority of proles.

'I recognized you on the pavement,' he said immediately. 'You're the
gentleman that bought the young lady's keepsake album. That was a beautiful
bit of paper, that was. Cream-laid, it used to be called. There's been no
paper like that made for--oh, I dare say fifty years.' He peered at Winston
over the top of his spectacles. 'Is there anything special I can do for
you? Or did you just want to look round?'

'I was passing,' said Winston vaguely. 'I just looked in. I don't want
anything in particular.'

'It's just as well,' said the other, 'because I don't suppose I could have
satisfied you.' He made an apologetic gesture with his softpalmed hand.
'You see how it is; an empty shop, you might say. Between you and me, the
antique trade's just about finished. No demand any longer, and no stock
either. Furniture, china, glass it's all been broken up by degrees. And
of course the metal stuff's mostly been melted down. I haven't seen a brass
candlestick in years.'

The tiny interior of the shop was in fact uncomfortably full, but there
was almost nothing in it of the slightest value. The floorspace was very
restricted, because all round the walls were stacked innumerable dusty
picture-frames. In the window there were trays of nuts and bolts, worn-out
chisels, penknives with broken blades, tarnished watches that did not even
pretend to be in going order, and other miscellaneous rubbish. Only on a
small table in the corner was there a litter of odds and ends--lacquered
snuffboxes, agate brooches, and the like--which looked as though they might
include something interesting. As Winston wandered towards the table his
eye was caught by a round, smooth thing that gleamed softly in the
lamplight, and he picked it up.

It was a heavy lump of glass, curved on one side, flat on the other, making
almost a hemisphere. There was a peculiar softness, as of rainwater, in
both the colour and the texture of the glass. At the heart of it, magnified
by the curved surface, there was a strange, pink, convoluted object that
recalled a rose or a sea anemone.

'What is it?' said Winston, fascinated.

'That's coral, that is,' said the old man. 'It must have come from the
Indian Ocean. They used to kind of embed it in the glass. That wasn't made
less than a hundred years ago. More, by the look of it.'

'It's a beautiful thing,' said Winston.

'It is a beautiful thing,' said the other appreciatively. 'But there's not
many that'd say so nowadays.' He coughed. 'Now, if it so happened that you
wanted to buy it, that'd cost you four dollars. I can remember when a thing
like that would have fetched eight pounds, and eight pounds was--well, I
can't work it out, but it was a lot of money. But who cares about genuine
antiques nowadays--even the few that's left?'

Winston immediately paid over the four dollars and slid the coveted thing
into his pocket. What appealed to him about it was not so much its beauty
as the air it seemed to possess of belonging to an age quite different
from the present one. The soft, rainwatery glass was not like any glass
that he had ever seen. The thing was doubly attractive because of its
apparent uselessness, though he could guess that it must once have been
intended as a paperweight. It was very heavy in his pocket, but fortunately
it did not make much of a bulge. It was a queer thing, even a compromising
thing, for a Party member to have in his possession. Anything old, and for
that matter anything beautiful, was always vaguely suspect. The old man had
grown noticeably more cheerful after receiving the four dollars. Winston
realized that he would have accepted three or even two.

'There's another room upstairs that you might care to take a look at,' he
said. 'There's not much in it. Just a few pieces. We'll do with a light if
we're going upstairs.'

He lit another lamp, and, with bowed back, led the way slowly up the
steep and worn stairs and along a tiny passage, into a room which did
not give on the street but looked out on a cobbled yard and a forest of
chimney-pots. Winston noticed that the furniture was still arranged as
though the room were meant to be lived in. There was a strip of carpet on
the floor, a picture or two on the walls, and a deep, slatternly arm-chair
drawn up to the fireplace. An old-fashioned glass clock with a twelve-hour
face was ticking away on the mantelpiece. Under the window, and occupying
nearly a quarter of the room, was an enormous bed with the mattress still
on it.

'We lived here till my wife died,' said the old man half apologetically.
'I'm selling the furniture off by little and little. Now that's a beautiful
mahogany bed, or at least it would be if you could get the bugs out of it.
But I dare say you'd find it a little bit cumbersome.'

He was holding the lamp high up, so as to illuminate the whole room, and
in the warm dim light the place looked curiously inviting. The thought
flitted through Winston's mind that it would probably be quite easy to
rent the room for a few dollars a week, if he dared to take the risk. It
was a wild, impossible notion, to be abandoned as soon as thought of; but
the room had awakened in him a sort of nostalgia, a sort of ancestral
memory. It seemed to him that he knew exactly what it felt like to sit in
a room like this, in an arm-chair beside an open fire with your feet in
the fender and a kettle on the hob; utterly alone, utterly secure, with
nobody watching you, no voice pursuing you, no sound except the singing
of the kettle and the friendly ticking of the clock.

'There's no telescreen!' he could not help murmuring.

'Ah,' said the old man, 'I never had one of those things. Too expensive.
And I never seemed to feel the need of it, somehow. Now that's a nice
gateleg table in the corner there. Though of course you'd have to put new
hinges on it if you wanted to use the flaps.'

There was a small bookcase in the other corner, and Winston had already
gravitated towards it. It contained nothing but rubbish. The hunting-down
and destruction of books had been done with the same thoroughness in the
prole quarters as everywhere else. It was very unlikely that there existed
anywhere in Oceania a copy of a book printed earlier than 1960. The old
man, still carrying the lamp, was standing in front of a picture in a
rosewood frame which hung on the other side of the fireplace, opposite
the bed.

'Now, if you happen to be interested in old prints at all----' he began
delicately.

Winston came across to examine the picture. It was a steel engraving of an
oval building with rectangular windows, and a small tower in front. There
was a railing running round the building, and at the rear end there was
what appeared to be a statue. Winston gazed at it for some moments. It
seemed vaguely familiar, though he did not remember the statue.

'The frame's fixed to the wall,' said the old man, 'but I could unscrew it
for you, I dare say.'

'I know that building,' said Winston finally. 'It's a ruin now. It's in
the middle of the street outside the Palace of Justice.'

'That's right. Outside the Law Courts. It was bombed in--oh, many years
ago. It was a church at one time, St Clement Danes, its name was.' He
smiled apologetically, as though conscious of saying something slightly
ridiculous, and added: 'Oranges and lemons, say the bells of St Clement's!'

'What's that?' said Winston.

'Oh--"Oranges and lemons, say the bells of St Clement's." That was a rhyme
we had when I was a little boy. How it goes on I don't remember, but I do
know it ended up, "Here comes a candle to light you to bed, Here comes a
chopper to chop off your head." It was a kind of a dance. They held out
their arms for you to pass under, and when they came to "Here comes a
chopper to chop off your head" they brought their arms down and caught you.
It was just names of churches. All the London churches were in it--all the
principal ones, that is.'

Winston wondered vaguely to what century the church belonged. It was always
difficult to determine the age of a London building. Anything large and
impressive, if it was reasonably new in appearance, was automatically
claimed as having been built since the Revolution, while anything that was
obviously of earlier date was ascribed to some dim period called the Middle
Ages. The centuries of capitalism were held to have produced nothing of any
value. One could not learn history from architecture any more than one
could learn it from books. Statues, inscriptions, memorial stones, the
names of streets--anything that might throw light upon the past had been
systematically altered.

'I never knew it had been a church,' he said.

'There's a lot of them left, really,' said the old man, 'though they've
been put to other uses. Now, how did that rhyme go? Ah! I've got it!


  "Oranges and lemons, say the bells of St Clement's,
  You owe me three farthings, say the bells of St Martin's----"


there, now, that's as far as I can get. A farthing, that was a small copper
coin, looked something like a cent.'

'Where was St Martin's?' said Winston.

'St Martin's? That's still standing. It's in Victory Square, alongside the
picture gallery. A building with a kind of a triangular porch and pillars
in front, and a big flight of steps.'

Winston knew the place well. It was a museum used for propaganda displays
of various kinds--scale models of rocket bombs and Floating Fortresses,
waxwork tableaux illustrating enemy atrocities, and the like.

'St Martin's-in-the-Fields it used to be called,' supplemented the old man,
'though I don't recollect any fields anywhere in those parts.'

Winston did not buy the picture. It would have been an even more
incongruous possession than the glass paperweight, and impossible to carry
home, unless it were taken out of its frame. But he lingered for some
minutes more, talking to the old man, whose name, he discovered, was not
Weeks--as one might have gathered from the inscription over the
shop-front--but Charrington. Mr Charrington, it seemed, was a widower aged
sixty-three and had inhabited this shop for thirty years. Throughout that
time he had been intending to alter the name over the window, but had never
quite got to the point of doing it. All the while that they were talking
the half-remembered rhyme kept running through Winston's head. Oranges and
lemons say the bells of St Clement's, You owe me three farthings, say
the bells of St Martin's! It was curious, but when you said it to yourself
you had the illusion of actually hearing bells, the bells of a lost London
that still existed somewhere or other, disguised and forgotten. From one
ghostly steeple after another he seemed to hear them pealing forth. Yet so
far as he could remember he had never in real life heard church bells
ringing.

He got away from Mr Charrington and went down the stairs alone, so as not
to let the old man see him reconnoitring the street before stepping out of
the door. He had already made up his mind that after a suitable
interval--a month, say--he would take the risk of visiting the shop again.
It was perhaps not more dangerous than shirking an evening at the Centre.
The serious piece of folly had been to come back here in the first place,
after buying the diary and without knowing whether the proprietor of the
shop could be trusted. However----!

Yes, he thought again, he would come back. He would buy further scraps of
beautiful rubbish. He would buy the engraving of St Clement Danes, take
it out of its frame, and carry it home concealed under the jacket of his
overalls. He would drag the rest of that poem out of Mr Charrington's
memory. Even the lunatic project of renting the room upstairs flashed
momentarily through his mind again. For perhaps five seconds exaltation
made him careless, and he stepped out on to the pavement without so much
as a preliminary glance through the window. He had even started humming
to an improvised tune


  Oranges and lemons, say the bells of St Clement's,
  You owe me three farthings, say the----


Suddenly his heart seemed to turn to ice and his bowels to water. A figure
in blue overalls was coming down the pavement, not ten metres away. It was
the girl from the Fiction Department, the girl with dark hair. The light
was failing, but there was no difficulty in recognizing her. She looked
him straight in the face, then walked quickly on as though she had not
seen him.

For a few seconds Winston was too paralysed to move. Then he turned to the
right and walked heavily away, not noticing for the moment that he was
going in the wrong direction. At any rate, one question was settled. There
was no doubting any longer that the girl was spying on him. She must have
followed him here, because it was not credible that by pure chance she
should have happened to be walking on the same evening up the same obscure
backstreet, kilometres distant from any quarter where Party members lived.
It was too great a coincidence. Whether she was really an agent of the
Thought Police, or simply an amateur spy actuated by officiousness, hardly
mattered. It was enough that she was watching him. Probably she had seen
him go into the pub as well.

It was an effort to walk. The lump of glass in his pocket banged against
his thigh at each step, and he was half minded to take it out and throw it
away. The worst thing was the pain in his belly. For a couple of minutes
he had the feeling that he would die if he did not reach a lavatory soon.
But there would be no public lavatories in a quarter like this. Then the
spasm passed, leaving a dull ache behind.

The street was a blind alley. Winston halted, stood for several seconds
wondering vaguely what to do, then turned round and began to retrace his
steps. As he turned it occurred to him that the girl had only passed him
three minutes ago and that by running he could probably catch up with her.
He could keep on her track till they were in some quiet place, and then
smash her skull in with a cobblestone. The piece of glass in his pocket
would be heavy enough for the job. But he abandoned the idea immediately,
because even the thought of making any physical effort was unbearable. He
could not run, he could not strike a blow. Besides, she was young and lusty
and would defend herself. He thought also of hurrying to the Community
Centre and staying there till the place closed, so as to establish a
partial alibi for the evening. But that too was impossible. A deadly
lassitude had taken hold of him. All he wanted was to get home quickly and
then sit down and be quiet.

It was after twenty-two hours when he got back to the flat. The lights
would be switched off at the main at twenty-three thirty. He went into the
kitchen and swallowed nearly a teacupful of Victory Gin. Then he went to
the table in the alcove, sat down, and took the diary out of the drawer.
But he did not open it at once. From the telescreen a brassy female voice
was squalling a patriotic song. He sat staring at the marbled cover of the
book, trying without success to shut the voice out of his consciousness.

It was at night that they came for you, always at night. The proper thing
was to kill yourself before they got you. Undoubtedly some people did so.
Many of the disappearances were actually suicides. But it needed desperate
courage to kill yourself in a world where firearms, or any quick and
certain poison, were completely unprocurable. He thought with a kind of
astonishment of the biological uselessness of pain and fear, the treachery
of the human body which always freezes into inertia at exactly the moment
when a special effort is needed. He might have silenced the dark-haired
girl if only he had acted quickly enough: but precisely because of the
extremity of his danger he had lost the power to act. It struck him that
in moments of crisis one is never fighting against an external enemy, but
always against one's own body. Even now, in spite of the gin, the dull
ache in his belly made consecutive thought impossible. And it is the same,
he perceived, in all seemingly heroic or tragic situations. On the
battlefield, in the torture chamber, on a sinking ship, the issues that
you are fighting for are always forgotten, because the body swells up until
it fills the universe, and even when you are not paralysed by fright or
screaming with pain, life is a moment-to-moment struggle against hunger or
cold or sleeplessness, against a sour stomach or an aching tooth.

He opened the diary. It was important to write something down. The woman
on the telescreen had started a new song. Her voice seemed to stick into
his brain like jagged splinters of glass. He tried to think of O'Brien,
for whom, or to whom, the diary was written, but instead he began thinking
of the things that would happen to him after the Thought Police took him
away. It would not matter if they killed you at once. To be killed was
what you expected. But before death (nobody spoke of such things, yet
everybody knew of them) there was the routine of confession that had to
be gone through: the grovelling on the floor and screaming for mercy, the
crack of broken bones, the smashed teeth and bloody clots of hair.

Why did you have to endure it, since the end was always the same? Why was
it not possible to cut a few days or weeks out of your life? Nobody ever
escaped detection, and nobody ever failed to confess. When once you had
succumbed to thoughtcrime it was certain that by a given date you would be
dead. Why then did that horror, which altered nothing, have to lie embedded
in future time?

He tried with a little more success than before to summon up the image of
O'Brien. 'We shall meet in the place where there is no darkness,' O'Brien
had said to him. He knew what it meant, or thought he knew. The place where
there is no darkness was the imagined future, which one would never see,
but which, by foreknowledge, one could mystically share in. But with the
voice from the telescreen nagging at his ears he could not follow the train
of thought further. He put a cigarette in his mouth. Half the tobacco
promptly fell out on to his tongue, a bitter dust which was difficult to
spit out again. The face of Big Brother swam into his mind, displacing that
of O'Brien. Just as he had done a few days earlier, he slid a coin out of
his pocket and looked at it. The face gazed up at him, heavy, calm,
protecting: but what kind of smile was hidden beneath the dark moustache?
Like a leaden knell the words came back at him:


  WAR IS PEACE
  FREEDOM IS SLAVERY
  IGNORANCE IS STRENGTH





PART TWO




Chapter 1



It was the middle of the morning, and Winston had left the cubicle to go
to the lavatory.

A solitary figure was coming towards him from the other end of the long,
brightly-lit corridor. It was the girl with dark hair. Four days had gone
past since the evening when he had run into her outside the junk-shop.
As she came nearer he saw that her right arm was in a sling, not noticeable
at a distance because it was of the same colour as her overalls. Probably
she had crushed her hand while swinging round one of the big kaleidoscopes
on which the plots of novels were 'roughed in'. It was a common accident
in the Fiction Department.

They were perhaps four metres apart when the girl stumbled and fell almost
flat on her face. A sharp cry of pain was wrung out of her. She must have
fallen right on the injured arm. Winston stopped short. The girl had risen
to her knees. Her face had turned a milky yellow colour against which her
mouth stood out redder than ever. Her eyes were fixed on his, with an
appealing expression that looked more like fear than pain.

A curious emotion stirred in Winston's heart. In front of him was an enemy
who was trying to kill him: in front of him, also, was a human creature,
in pain and perhaps with a broken bone. Already he had instinctively
started forward to help her. In the moment when he had seen her fall on
the bandaged arm, it had been as though he felt the pain in his own body.

'You're hurt?' he said.

'It's nothing. My arm. It'll be all right in a second.'

She spoke as though her heart were fluttering. She had certainly turned
very pale.

'You haven't broken anything?'

'No, I'm all right. It hurt for a moment, that's all.'

She held out her free hand to him, and he helped her up. She had regained
some of her colour, and appeared very much better.

'It's nothing,' she repeated shortly. 'I only gave my wrist a bit of a
bang. Thanks, comrade!'

And with that she walked on in the direction in which she had been going,
as briskly as though it had really been nothing. The whole incident could
not have taken as much as half a minute. Not to let one's feelings appear
in one's face was a habit that had acquired the status of an instinct,
and in any case they had been standing straight in front of a telescreen
when the thing happened. Nevertheless it had been very difficult not to
betray a momentary surprise, for in the two or three seconds while he was
helping her up the girl had slipped something into his hand. There was no
question that she had done it intentionally. It was something small and
flat. As he passed through the lavatory door he transferred it to his
pocket and felt it with the tips of his fingers. It was a scrap of paper
folded into a square.

While he stood at the urinal he managed, with a little more fingering, to
get it unfolded. Obviously there must be a message of some kind written on
it. For a moment he was tempted to take it into one of the water-closets
and read it at once. But that would be shocking folly, as he well knew.
There was no place where you could be more certain that the telescreens
were watched continuously.

He went back to his cubicle, sat down, threw the fragment of paper
casually among the other papers on the desk, put on his spectacles and
hitched the speakwrite towards him. 'Five minutes,' he told himself,
'five minutes at the very least!' His heart bumped in his breast with
frightening loudness. Fortunately the piece of work he was engaged on was
mere routine, the rectification of a long list of figures, not needing
close attention.

Whatever was written on the paper, it must have some kind of political
meaning. So far as he could see there were two possibilities. One, much
the more likely, was that the girl was an agent of the Thought Police,
just as he had feared. He did not know why the Thought Police should
choose to deliver their messages in such a fashion, but perhaps they had
their reasons. The thing that was written on the paper might be a threat, a
summons, an order to commit suicide, a trap of some description. But there
was another, wilder possibility that kept raising its head, though he
tried vainly to suppress it. This was, that the message did not come from
the Thought Police at all, but from some kind of underground organization.
Perhaps the Brotherhood existed after all! Perhaps the girl was part of it!
No doubt the idea was absurd, but it had sprung into his mind in the very
instant of feeling the scrap of paper in his hand. It was not till a couple
of minutes later that the other, more probable explanation had occurred to
him. And even now, though his intellect told him that the message probably
meant death--still, that was not what he believed, and the unreasonable
hope persisted, and his heart banged, and it was with difficulty that he
kept his voice from trembling as he murmured his figures into the
speakwrite.

He rolled up the completed bundle of work and slid it into the pneumatic
tube. Eight minutes had gone by. He re-adjusted his spectacles on his nose,
sighed, and drew the next batch of work towards him, with the scrap of
paper on top of it. He flattened it out. On it was written, in a large
unformed handwriting:

I LOVE YOU.

For several seconds he was too stunned even to throw the incriminating
thing into the memory hole. When he did so, although he knew very well the
danger of showing too much interest, he could not resist reading it once
again, just to make sure that the words were really there.

For the rest of the morning it was very difficult to work. What was even
worse than having to focus his mind on a series of niggling jobs was the
need to conceal his agitation from the telescreen. He felt as though a
fire were burning in his belly. Lunch in the hot, crowded, noise-filled
canteen was torment. He had hoped to be alone for a little while during
the lunch hour, but as bad luck would have it the imbecile Parsons flopped
down beside him, the tang of his sweat almost defeating the tinny smell of
stew, and kept up a stream of talk about the preparations for Hate Week.
He was particularly enthusiastic about a papier-mache model of Big
Brother's head, two metres wide, which was being made for the occasion by
his daughter's troop of Spies. The irritating thing was that in the racket
of voices Winston could hardly hear what Parsons was saying, and was
constantly having to ask for some fatuous remark to be repeated. Just once
he caught a glimpse of the girl, at a table with two other girls at the
far end of the room. She appeared not to have seen him, and he did not
look in that direction again.

The afternoon was more bearable. Immediately after lunch there arrived a
delicate, difficult piece of work which would take several hours and
necessitated putting everything else aside. It consisted in falsifying a
series of production reports of two years ago, in such a way as to cast
discredit on a prominent member of the Inner Party, who was now under a
cloud. This was the kind of thing that Winston was good at, and for more
than two hours he succeeded in shutting the girl out of his mind
altogether. Then the memory of her face came back, and with it a raging,
intolerable desire to be alone. Until he could be alone it was impossible
to think this new development out. Tonight was one of his nights at the
Community Centre. He wolfed another tasteless meal in the canteen, hurried
off to the Centre, took part in the solemn foolery of a 'discussion group',
played two games of table tennis, swallowed several glasses of gin, and
sat for half an hour through a lecture entitled 'Ingsoc in relation to
chess'. His soul writhed with boredom, but for once he had had no impulse
to shirk his evening at the Centre. At the sight of the words I LOVE YOU
the desire to stay alive had welled up in him, and the taking of minor
risks suddenly seemed stupid. It was not till twenty-three hours, when he
was home and in bed--in the darkness, where you were safe even from the
telescreen so long as you kept silent--that he was able to think
continuously.

It was a physical problem that had to be solved: how to get in touch with
the girl and arrange a meeting. He did not consider any longer the
possibility that she might be laying some kind of trap for him. He knew
that it was not so, because of her unmistakable agitation when she handed
him the note. Obviously she had been frightened out of her wits, as well
she might be. Nor did the idea of refusing her advances even cross his
mind. Only five nights ago he had contemplated smashing her skull in with
a cobblestone, but that was of no importance. He thought of her naked,
youthful body, as he had seen it in his dream. He had imagined her a fool
like all the rest of them, her head stuffed with lies and hatred, her
belly full of ice. A kind of fever seized him at the thought that he might
lose her, the white youthful body might slip away from him! What he feared
more than anything else was that she would simply change her mind if he
did not get in touch with her quickly. But the physical difficulty of
meeting was enormous. It was like trying to make a move at chess when you
were already mated. Whichever way you turned, the telescreen faced you.
Actually, all the possible ways of communicating with her had occurred to
him within five minutes of reading the note; but now, with time to think,
he went over them one by one, as though laying out a row of instruments
on a table.

Obviously the kind of encounter that had happened this morning could not
be repeated. If she had worked in the Records Department it might have
been comparatively simple, but he had only a very dim idea whereabouts in
the building the Fiction Department lay, and he had no pretext for going
there. If he had known where she lived, and at what time she left work,
he could have contrived to meet her somewhere on her way home; but to try
to follow her home was not safe, because it would mean loitering about
outside the Ministry, which was bound to be noticed. As for sending a
letter through the mails, it was out of the question. By a routine that
was not even secret, all letters were opened in transit. Actually, few
people ever wrote letters. For the messages that it was occasionally
necessary to send, there were printed postcards with long lists of phrases,
and you struck out the ones that were inapplicable. In any case he did not
know the girl's name, let alone her address. Finally he decided that the
safest place was the canteen. If he could get her at a table by herself,
somewhere in the middle of the room, not too near the telescreens, and
with a sufficient buzz of conversation all round--if these conditions
endured for, say, thirty seconds, it might be possible to exchange a few
words.

For a week after this, life was like a restless dream. On the next day she
did not appear in the canteen until he was leaving it, the whistle having
already blown. Presumably she had been changed on to a later shift. They
passed each other without a glance. On the day after that she was in the
canteen at the usual time, but with three other girls and immediately
under a telescreen. Then for three dreadful days she did not appear at
all. His whole mind and body seemed to be afflicted with an unbearable
sensitivity, a sort of transparency, which made every movement, every
sound, every contact, every word that he had to speak or listen to, an
agony. Even in sleep he could not altogether escape from her image. He did
not touch the diary during those days. If there was any relief, it was in
his work, in which he could sometimes forget himself for ten minutes at a
stretch. He had absolutely no clue as to what had happened to her. There
was no enquiry he could make. She might have been vaporized, she might
have committed suicide, she might have been transferred to the other end
of Oceania: worst and likeliest of all, she might simply have changed her
mind and decided to avoid him.

The next day she reappeared. Her arm was out of the sling and she had a
band of sticking-plaster round her wrist. The relief of seeing her was
so great that he could not resist staring directly at her for several
seconds. On the following day he very nearly succeeded in speaking to her.
When he came into the canteen she was sitting at a table well out from the
wall, and was quite alone. It was early, and the place was not very full.
The queue edged forward till Winston was almost at the counter, then was
held up for two minutes because someone in front was complaining that he
had not received his tablet of saccharine. But the girl was still alone
when Winston secured his tray and began to make for her table. He walked
casually towards her, his eyes searching for a place at some table beyond
her. She was perhaps three metres away from him. Another two seconds would
do it. Then a voice behind him called, 'Smith!' He pretended not to hear.
'Smith!' repeated the voice, more loudly. It was no use. He turned round.
A blond-headed, silly-faced young man named Wilsher, whom he barely knew,
was inviting him with a smile to a vacant place at his table. It was not
safe to refuse. After having been recognized, he could not go and sit at
a table with an unattended girl. It was too noticeable. He sat down with
a friendly smile. The silly blond face beamed into his. Winston had a
hallucination of himself smashing a pick-axe right into the middle of it.
The girl's table filled up a few minutes later.

But she must have seen him coming towards her, and perhaps she would take
the hint. Next day he took care to arrive early. Surely enough, she was at
a table in about the same place, and again alone. The person immediately
ahead of him in the queue was a small, swiftly-moving, beetle-like man
with a flat face and tiny, suspicious eyes. As Winston turned away from
the counter with his tray, he saw that the little man was making straight
for the girl's table. His hopes sank again. There was a vacant place at a
table further away, but something in the little man's appearance suggested
that he would be sufficiently attentive to his own comfort to choose the
emptiest table. With ice at his heart Winston followed. It was no use
unless he could get the girl alone. At this moment there was a tremendous
crash. The little man was sprawling on all fours, his tray had gone flying,
two streams of soup and coffee were flowing across the floor. He started
to his feet with a malignant glance at Winston, whom he evidently
suspected of having tripped him up. But it was all right. Five seconds
later, with a thundering heart, Winston was sitting at the girl's table.

He did not look at her. He unpacked his tray and promptly began eating.
It was all-important to speak at once, before anyone else came, but now
a terrible fear had taken possession of him. A week had gone by since
she had first approached him. She would have changed her mind, she must
have changed her mind! It was impossible that this affair should end
successfully; such things did not happen in real life. He might have
flinched altogether from speaking if at this moment he had not seen
Ampleforth, the hairy-eared poet, wandering limply round the room with
a tray, looking for a place to sit down. In his vague way Ampleforth
was attached to Winston, and would certainly sit down at his table if
he caught sight of him. There was perhaps a minute in which to act. Both
Winston and the girl were eating steadily. The stuff they were eating was
a thin stew, actually a soup, of haricot beans. In a low murmur Winston
began speaking. Neither of them looked up; steadily they spooned the
watery stuff into their mouths, and between spoonfuls exchanged the few
necessary words in low expressionless voices.

'What time do you leave work?'

'Eighteen-thirty.'

'Where can we meet?'

'Victory Square, near the monument.'

'It's full of telescreens.'

'It doesn't matter if there's a crowd.'

'Any signal?'

'No. Don't come up to me until you see me among a lot of people. And don't
look at me. Just keep somewhere near me.'

'What time?'

'Nineteen hours.'

'All right.'

Ampleforth failed to see Winston and sat down at another table. They did
not speak again, and, so far as it was possible for two people sitting on
opposite sides of the same table, they did not look at one another. The
girl finished her lunch quickly and made off, while Winston stayed to
smoke a cigarette.

Winston was in Victory Square before the appointed time. He wandered round
the base of the enormous fluted column, at the top of which Big Brother's
statue gazed southward towards the skies where he had vanquished the
Eurasian aeroplanes (the Eastasian aeroplanes, it had been, a few years
ago) in the Battle of Airstrip One. In the street in front of it there was
a statue of a man on horseback which was supposed to represent Oliver
Cromwell. At five minutes past the hour the girl had still not appeared.
Again the terrible fear seized upon Winston. She was not coming, she had
changed her mind! He walked slowly up to the north side of the square and
got a sort of pale-coloured pleasure from identifying St Martin's Church,
whose bells, when it had bells, had chimed 'You owe me three farthings.'
Then he saw the girl standing at the base of the monument, reading or
pretending to read a poster which ran spirally up the column. It was not
safe to go near her until some more people had accumulated. There were
telescreens all round the pediment. But at this moment there was a din of
shouting and a zoom of heavy vehicles from somewhere to the left. Suddenly
everyone seemed to be running across the square. The girl nipped nimbly
round the lions at the base of the monument and joined in the rush.
Winston followed. As he ran, he gathered from some shouted remarks that
a convoy of Eurasian prisoners was passing.

Already a dense mass of people was blocking the south side of the square.
Winston, at normal times the kind of person who gravitates to the outer
edge of any kind of scrimmage, shoved, butted, squirmed his way forward
into the heart of the crowd. Soon he was within arm's length of the girl,
but the way was blocked by an enormous prole and an almost equally enormous
woman, presumably his wife, who seemed to form an impenetrable wall of
flesh. Winston wriggled himself sideways, and with a violent lunge managed
to drive his shoulder between them. For a moment it felt as though his
entrails were being ground to pulp between the two muscular hips, then he
had broken through, sweating a little. He was next to the girl. They were
shoulder to shoulder, both staring fixedly in front of them.

A long line of trucks, with wooden-faced guards armed with sub-machine
guns standing upright in each corner, was passing slowly down the street.
In the trucks little yellow men in shabby greenish uniforms were squatting,
jammed close together. Their sad, Mongolian faces gazed out over the sides
of the trucks utterly incurious. Occasionally when a truck jolted there
was a clank-clank of metal: all the prisoners were wearing leg-irons.
Truck-load after truck-load of the sad faces passed. Winston knew they
were there but he saw them only intermittently. The girl's shoulder, and
her arm right down to the elbow, were pressed against his. Her cheek was
almost near enough for him to feel its warmth. She had immediately taken
charge of the situation, just as she had done in the canteen. She began
speaking in the same expressionless voice as before, with lips barely
moving, a mere murmur easily drowned by the din of voices and the rumbling
of the trucks.

'Can you hear me?'

'Yes.'

'Can you get Sunday afternoon off?'

'Yes.'

'Then listen carefully. You'll have to remember this. Go to Paddington
Station----'

With a sort of military precision that astonished him, she outlined the
route that he was to follow. A half-hour railway journey; turn left outside
the station; two kilometres along the road; a gate with the top bar
missing; a path across a field; a grass-grown lane; a track between bushes;
a dead tree with moss on it. It was as though she had a map inside her
head. 'Can you remember all that?' she murmured finally.

'Yes.'

'You turn left, then right, then left again. And the gate's got no top bar.'

'Yes. What time?'

'About fifteen. You may have to wait. I'll get there by another way. Are
you sure you remember everything?'

'Yes.'

'Then get away from me as quick as you can.'

She need not have told him that. But for the moment they could not
extricate themselves from the crowd. The trucks were still filing past,
the people still insatiably gaping. At the start there had been a few boos
and hisses, but it came only from the Party members among the crowd, and
had soon stopped. The prevailing emotion was simply curiosity. Foreigners,
whether from Eurasia or from Eastasia, were a kind of strange animal. One
literally never saw them except in the guise of prisoners, and even as
prisoners one never got more than a momentary glimpse of them. Nor did
one know what became of them, apart from the few who were hanged as
war-criminals: the others simply vanished, presumably into forced-labour
camps. The round Mogol faces had given way to faces of a more European
type, dirty, bearded and exhausted. From over scrubby cheekbones eyes
looked into Winston's, sometimes with strange intensity, and flashed away
again. The convoy was drawing to an end. In the last truck he could see an
aged man, his face a mass of grizzled hair, standing upright with wrists
crossed in front of him, as though he were used to having them bound
together. It was almost time for Winston and the girl to part. But at the
last moment, while the crowd still hemmed them in, her hand felt for his
and gave it a fleeting squeeze.

It could not have been ten seconds, and yet it seemed a long time that
their hands were clasped together. He had time to learn every detail
of her hand. He explored the long fingers, the shapely nails, the
work-hardened palm with its row of callouses, the smooth flesh under the
wrist. Merely from feeling it he would have known it by sight. In the
same instant it occurred to him that he did not know what colour the
girl's eyes were. They were probably brown, but people with dark hair
sometimes had blue eyes. To turn his head and look at her would have
been inconceivable folly. With hands locked together, invisible among
the press of bodies, they stared steadily in front of them, and instead
of the eyes of the girl, the eyes of the aged prisoner gazed mournfully
at Winston out of nests of hair.




Chapter 2



Winston picked his way up the lane through dappled light and shade,
stepping out into pools of gold wherever the boughs parted. Under the
trees to the left of him the ground was misty with bluebells. The air
seemed to kiss one's skin. It was the second of May. From somewhere deeper
in the heart of the wood came the droning of ring-doves.

He was a bit early. There had been no difficulties about the journey, and
the girl was so evidently experienced that he was less frightened than he
would normally have been. Presumably she could be trusted to find a safe
place. In general you could not assume that you were much safer in the
country than in London. There were no telescreens, of course, but there
was always the danger of concealed microphones by which your voice might
be picked up and recognized; besides, it was not easy to make a journey
by yourself without attracting attention. For distances of less than
100 kilometres it was not necessary to get your passport endorsed, but
sometimes there were patrols hanging about the railway stations, who
examined the papers of any Party member they found there and asked awkward
questions. However, no patrols had appeared, and on the walk from the
station he had made sure by cautious backward glances that he was not
being followed. The train was full of proles, in holiday mood because of
the summery weather. The wooden-seated carriage in which he travelled was
filled to overflowing by a single enormous family, ranging from a toothless
great-grandmother to a month-old baby, going out to spend an afternoon
with 'in-laws' in the country, and, as they freely explained to Winston,
to get hold of a little black-market butter.

The lane widened, and in a minute he came to the footpath she had told him
of, a mere cattle-track which plunged between the bushes. He had no watch,
but it could not be fifteen yet. The bluebells were so thick underfoot
that it was impossible not to tread on them. He knelt down and began
picking some partly to pass the time away, but also from a vague idea that
he would like to have a bunch of flowers to offer to the girl when they
met. He had got together a big bunch and was smelling their faint sickly
scent when a sound at his back froze him, the unmistakable crackle of a
foot on twigs. He went on picking bluebells. It was the best thing to do.
It might be the girl, or he might have been followed after all. To look
round was to show guilt. He picked another and another. A hand fell
lightly on his shoulder.

He looked up. It was the girl. She shook her head, evidently as a warning
that he must keep silent, then parted the bushes and quickly led the way
along the narrow track into the wood. Obviously she had been that way
before, for she dodged the boggy bits as though by habit. Winston followed,
still clasping his bunch of flowers. His first feeling was relief, but as
he watched the strong slender body moving in front of him, with the scarlet
sash that was just tight enough to bring out the curve of her hips, the
sense of his own inferiority was heavy upon him. Even now it seemed quite
likely that when she turned round and looked at him she would draw back
after all. The sweetness of the air and the greenness of the leaves daunted
him. Already on the walk from the station the May sunshine had made him
feel dirty and etiolated, a creature of indoors, with the sooty dust of
London in the pores of his skin. It occurred to him that till now she had
probably never seen him in broad daylight in the open. They came to the
fallen tree that she had spoken of. The girl hopped over and forced apart
the bushes, in which there did not seem to be an opening. When Winston
followed her, he found that they were in a natural clearing, a tiny grassy
knoll surrounded by tall saplings that shut it in completely. The girl
stopped and turned.

'Here we are,' she said.

He was facing her at several paces' distance. As yet he did not dare move
nearer to her.

'I didn't want to say anything in the lane,' she went on, 'in case there's
a mike hidden there. I don't suppose there is, but there could be. There's
always the chance of one of those swine recognizing your voice. We're all
right here.'

He still had not the courage to approach her. 'We're all right here?'
he repeated stupidly.

'Yes. Look at the trees.' They were small ashes, which at some time had
been cut down and had sprouted up again into a forest of poles, none of
them thicker than one's wrist. 'There's nothing big enough to hide a mike
in. Besides, I've been here before.'

They were only making conversation. He had managed to move closer to her
now. She stood before him very upright, with a smile on her face that
looked faintly ironical, as though she were wondering why he was so slow
to act. The bluebells had cascaded on to the ground. They seemed to have
fallen of their own accord. He took her hand.

'Would you believe,' he said, 'that till this moment I didn't know what
colour your eyes were?' They were brown, he noted, a rather light shade of
brown, with dark lashes. 'Now that you've seen what I'm really like,
can you still bear to look at me?'

'Yes, easily.'

'I'm thirty-nine years old. I've got a wife that I can't get rid of. I've
got varicose veins. I've got five false teeth.'

'I couldn't care less,' said the girl.

The next moment, it was hard to say by whose act, she was in his arms.
At the beginning he had no feeling except sheer incredulity. The youthful
body was strained against his own, the mass of dark hair was against his
face, and yes! actually she had turned her face up and he was kissing the
wide red mouth. She had clasped her arms about his neck, she was calling
him darling, precious one, loved one. He had pulled her down on to the
ground, she was utterly unresisting, he could do what he liked with her.
But the truth was that he had no physical sensation, except that of mere
contact. All he felt was incredulity and pride. He was glad that this was
happening, but he had no physical desire. It was too soon, her youth and
prettiness had frightened him, he was too much used to living without
women--he did not know the reason. The girl picked herself up and pulled a
bluebell out of her hair. She sat against him, putting her arm round his
waist.

'Never mind, dear. There's no hurry. We've got the whole afternoon. Isn't
this a splendid hide-out? I found it when I got lost once on a community
hike. If anyone was coming you could hear them a hundred metres away.'

'What is your name?' said Winston.

'Julia. I know yours. It's Winston--Winston Smith.'

'How did you find that out?'

'I expect I'm better at finding things out than you are, dear. Tell me,
what did you think of me before that day I gave you the note?'

He did not feel any temptation to tell lies to her. It was even a sort of
love-offering to start off by telling the worst.

'I hated the sight of you,' he said. 'I wanted to rape you and then murder
you afterwards. Two weeks ago I thought seriously of smashing your head in
with a cobblestone. If you really want to know, I imagined that you had
something to do with the Thought Police.'

The girl laughed delightedly, evidently taking this as a
tribute to the excellence of her disguise.

'Not the Thought Police! You didn't honestly think that?'

'Well, perhaps not exactly that. But from your general appearance--merely
because you're young and fresh and healthy, you understand--I thought that
probably----'

'You thought I was a good Party member. Pure in word and deed. Banners,
processions, slogans, games, community hikes all that stuff. And you
thought that if I had a quarter of a chance I'd denounce you as a
thought-criminal and get you killed off?'

'Yes, something of that kind. A great many young girls are like that,
you know.'

'It's this bloody thing that does it,' she said, ripping off the scarlet
sash of the Junior Anti-Sex League and flinging it on to a bough. Then,
as though touching her waist had reminded her of something, she felt in
the pocket of her overalls and produced a small slab of chocolate. She
broke it in half and gave one of the pieces to Winston. Even before he had
taken it he knew by the smell that it was very unusual chocolate. It was
dark and shiny, and was wrapped in silver paper. Chocolate normally was
dull-brown crumbly stuff that tasted, as nearly as one could describe it,
like the smoke of a rubbish fire. But at some time or another he had tasted
chocolate like the piece she had given him. The first whiff of its scent
had stirred up some memory which he could not pin down, but which was
powerful and troubling.

'Where did you get this stuff?' he said.

'Black market,' she said indifferently. 'Actually I am that sort of girl,
to look at. I'm good at games. I was a troop-leader in the Spies. I do
voluntary work three evenings a week for the Junior Anti-Sex League. Hours
and hours I've spent pasting their bloody rot all over London. I always
carry one end of a banner in the processions. I always look cheerful and
I never shirk anything. Always yell with the crowd, that's what I say.
It's the only way to be safe.'

The first fragment of chocolate had melted on Winston's tongue. The taste
was delightful. But there was still that memory moving round the edges of
his consciousness, something strongly felt but not reducible to definite
shape, like an object seen out of the corner of one's eye. He pushed it
away from him, aware only that it was the memory of some action which he
would have liked to undo but could not.

'You are very young,' he said. 'You are ten or fifteen years younger than
I am. What could you see to attract you in a man like me?'

'It was something in your face. I thought I'd take a chance. I'm good at
spotting people who don't belong. As soon as I saw you I knew you were
against THEM.'

THEM, it appeared, meant the Party, and above all the Inner Party, about
whom she talked with an open jeering hatred which made Winston feel uneasy,
although he knew that they were safe here if they could be safe anywhere.
A thing that astonished him about her was the coarseness of her language.
Party members were supposed not to swear, and Winston himself very seldom
did swear, aloud, at any rate. Julia, however, seemed unable to mention
the Party, and especially the Inner Party, without using the kind of words
that you saw chalked up in dripping alley-ways. He did not dislike it. It
was merely one symptom of her revolt against the Party and all its ways,
and somehow it seemed natural and healthy, like the sneeze of a horse that
smells bad hay. They had left the clearing and were wandering again
through the chequered shade, with their arms round each other's waists
whenever it was wide enough to walk two abreast. He noticed how much
softer her waist seemed to feel now that the sash was gone. They did not
speak above a whisper. Outside the clearing, Julia said, it was better to
go quietly. Presently they had reached the edge of the little wood. She
stopped him.

'Don't go out into the open. There might be someone watching. We're all
right if we keep behind the boughs.'

They were standing in the shade of hazel bushes. The sunlight, filtering
through innumerable leaves, was still hot on their faces. Winston looked
out into the field beyond, and underwent a curious, slow shock of
recognition. He knew it by sight. An old, close-bitten pasture, with a
footpath wandering across it and a molehill here and there. In the ragged
hedge on the opposite side the boughs of the elm trees swayed just
perceptibly in the breeze, and their leaves stirred faintly in dense
masses like women's hair. Surely somewhere nearby, but out of sight,
there must be a stream with green pools where dace were swimming?

'Isn't there a stream somewhere near here?' he whispered.

'That's right, there is a stream. It's at the edge of the next field,
actually. There are fish in it, great big ones. You can watch them lying
in the pools under the willow trees, waving their tails.'

'It's the Golden Country--almost,' he murmured.

'The Golden Country?'

'It's nothing, really. A landscape I've seen sometimes in a dream.'

'Look!' whispered Julia.

A thrush had alighted on a bough not five metres away, almost at the level
of their faces. Perhaps it had not seen them. It was in the sun, they in
the shade. It spread out its wings, fitted them carefully into place
again, ducked its head for a moment, as though making a sort of obeisance
to the sun, and then began to pour forth a torrent of song. In the
afternoon hush the volume of sound was startling. Winston and Julia clung
together, fascinated. The music went on and on, minute after minute, with
astonishing variations, never once repeating itself, almost as though the
bird were deliberately showing off its virtuosity. Sometimes it stopped
for a few seconds, spread out and resettled its wings, then swelled its
speckled breast and again burst into song. Winston watched it with a sort
of vague reverence. For whom, for what, was that bird singing? No mate,
no rival was watching it. What made it sit at the edge of the lonely wood
and pour its music into nothingness? He wondered whether after all there
was a microphone hidden somewhere near. He and Julia had spoken only in
low whispers, and it would not pick up what they had said, but it would
pick up the thrush. Perhaps at the other end of the instrument some small,
beetle-like man was listening intently--listening to that. But by degrees
the flood of music drove all speculations out of his mind. It was as
though it were a kind of liquid stuff that poured all over him and got
mixed up with the sunlight that filtered through the leaves. He stopped
thinking and merely felt. The girl's waist in the bend of his arm was soft
and warm. He pulled her round so that they were breast to breast; her body
seemed to melt into his. Wherever his hands moved it was all as yielding as
water. Their mouths clung together; it was quite different from the hard
kisses they had exchanged earlier. When they moved their faces apart again
both of them sighed deeply. The bird took fright and fled with a clatter
of wings.

Winston put his lips against her ear. 'NOW,' he whispered.

'Not here,' she whispered back. 'Come back to the hide-out. It's safer.'

Quickly, with an occasional crackle of twigs, they threaded their way back
to the clearing. When they were once inside the ring of saplings she turned
and faced him. They were both breathing fast, but the smile had reappeared
round the corners of her mouth. She stood looking at him for an instant,
then felt at the zipper of her overalls. And, yes! it was almost as in his
dream. Almost as swiftly as he had imagined it, she had torn her clothes
off, and when she flung them aside it was with that same magnificent
gesture by which a whole civilization seemed to be annihilated. Her body
gleamed white in the sun. But for a moment he did not look at her body;
his eyes were anchored by the freckled face with its faint, bold smile.
He knelt down before her and took her hands in his.

'Have you done this before?'

'Of course. Hundreds of times--well, scores of times, anyway.'

'With Party members?'

'Yes, always with Party members.'

'With members of the Inner Party?'

'Not with those swine, no. But there's plenty that WOULD if they got half
a chance. They're not so holy as they make out.'

His heart leapt. Scores of times she had done it: he wished it had been
hundreds--thousands. Anything that hinted at corruption always filled him
with a wild hope. Who knew, perhaps the Party was rotten under the surface,
its cult of strenuousness and self-denial simply a sham concealing
iniquity. If he could have infected the whole lot of them with leprosy or
syphilis, how gladly he would have done so! Anything to rot, to weaken, to
undermine! He pulled her down so that they were kneeling face to face.

'Listen. The more men you've had, the more I love you. Do you understand
that?'

'Yes, perfectly.'

'I hate purity, I hate goodness! I don't want any virtue to exist anywhere.
I want everyone to be corrupt to the bones.'

'Well then, I ought to suit you, dear. I'm corrupt to the bones.'

'You like doing this? I don't mean simply me: I mean the thing in itself?'

'I adore it.'

That was above all what he wanted to hear. Not merely the love of one
person but the animal instinct, the simple undifferentiated desire: that
was the force that would tear the Party to pieces. He pressed her down
upon the grass, among the fallen bluebells. This time there was no
difficulty. Presently the rising and falling of their breasts slowed to
normal speed, and in a sort of pleasant helplessness they fell apart. The
sun seemed to have grown hotter. They were both sleepy. He reached out for
the discarded overalls and pulled them partly over her. Almost immediately
they fell asleep and slept for about half an hour.

Winston woke first. He sat up and watched the freckled face, still
peacefully asleep, pillowed on the palm of her hand. Except for her mouth,
you could not call her beautiful. There was a line or two round the eyes,
if you looked closely. The short dark hair was extraordinarily thick and
soft. It occurred to him that he still did not know her surname or where
she lived.

The young, strong body, now helpless in sleep, awoke in him a pitying,
protecting feeling. But the mindless tenderness that he had felt under
the hazel tree, while the thrush was singing, had not quite come back.
He pulled the overalls aside and studied her smooth white flank. In the
old days, he thought, a man looked at a girl's body and saw that it was
desirable, and that was the end of the story. But you could not have pure
love or pure lust nowadays. No emotion was pure, because everything was
mixed up with fear and hatred. Their embrace had been a battle, the climax
a victory. It was a blow struck against the Party. It was a political act.




Chapter 3



'We can come here once again,' said Julia. 'It's generally safe to use any
hide-out twice. But not for another month or two, of course.'

As soon as she woke up her demeanour had changed. She became alert and
business-like, put her clothes on, knotted the scarlet sash about her
waist, and began arranging the details of the journey home. It seemed
natural to leave this to her. She obviously had a practical cunning which
Winston lacked, and she seemed also to have an exhaustive knowledge of the
countryside round London, stored away from innumerable community hikes.
The route she gave him was quite different from the one by which he had
come, and brought him out at a different railway station. 'Never go home
the same way as you went out,' she said, as though enunciating an important
general principle. She would leave first, and Winston was to wait half an
hour before following her.

She had named a place where they could meet after work, four evenings
hence. It was a street in one of the poorer quarters, where there was an
open market which was generally crowded and noisy. She would be hanging
about among the stalls, pretending to be in search of shoelaces or
sewing-thread. If she judged that the coast was clear she would blow
her nose when he approached; otherwise he was to walk past her without
recognition. But with luck, in the middle of the crowd, it would be
safe to talk for a quarter of an hour and arrange another meeting.

'And now I must go,' she said as soon as he had mastered his instructions.
'I'm due back at nineteen-thirty. I've got to put in two hours for the
Junior Anti-Sex League, handing out leaflets, or something. Isn't it
bloody? Give me a brush-down, would you? Have I got any twigs in my hair?
Are you sure? Then good-bye, my love, good-bye!'

She flung herself into his arms, kissed him almost violently, and a moment
later pushed her way through the saplings and disappeared into the wood
with very little noise. Even now he had not found out her surname or her
address. However, it made no difference, for it was inconceivable that
they could ever meet indoors or exchange any kind of written communication.

As it happened, they never went back to the clearing in the wood. During
the month of May there was only one further occasion on which they actually
succeeded in making love. That was in another hiding-place known to Julia,
the belfry of a ruinous church in an almost-deserted stretch of country
where an atomic bomb had fallen thirty years earlier. It was a good
hiding-place when once you got there, but the getting there was very
dangerous. For the rest they could meet only in the streets, in a different
place every evening and never for more than half an hour at a time. In the
street it was usually possible to talk, after a fashion. As they drifted
down the crowded pavements, not quite abreast and never looking at one
another, they carried on a curious, intermittent conversation which flicked
on and off like the beams of a lighthouse, suddenly nipped into silence
by the approach of a Party uniform or the proximity of a telescreen, then
taken up again minutes later in the middle of a sentence, then abruptly
cut short as they parted at the agreed spot, then continued almost without
introduction on the following day. Julia appeared to be quite used to this
kind of conversation, which she called 'talking by instalments'. She was
also surprisingly adept at speaking without moving her lips. Just once in
almost a month of nightly meetings they managed to exchange a kiss. They
were passing in silence down a side-street (Julia would never speak when
they were away from the main streets) when there was a deafening roar, the
earth heaved, and the air darkened, and Winston found himself lying on his
side, bruised and terrified. A rocket bomb must have dropped quite near at
hand. Suddenly he became aware of Julia's face a few centimetres from his
own, deathly white, as white as chalk. Even her lips were white. She was
dead! He clasped her against him and found that he was kissing a live
warm face. But there was some powdery stuff that got in the way of his
lips. Both of their faces were thickly coated with plaster.

There were evenings when they reached their rendezvous and then had to
walk past one another without a sign, because a patrol had just come round
the corner or a helicopter was hovering overhead. Even if it had been
less dangerous, it would still have been difficult to find time to meet.
Winston's working week was sixty hours, Julia's was even longer, and
their free days varied according to the pressure of work and did not
often coincide. Julia, in any case, seldom had an evening completely free.
She spent an astonishing amount of time in attending lectures and
demonstrations, distributing literature for the junior Anti-Sex League,
preparing banners for Hate Week, making collections for the savings
campaign, and such-like activities. It paid, she said, it was camouflage.
If you kept the small rules, you could break the big ones. She even induced
Winston to mortgage yet another of his evenings by enrolling himself for
the part-time munition work which was done voluntarily by zealous Party
members. So, one evening every week, Winston spent four hours of paralysing
boredom, screwing together small bits of metal which were probably parts
of bomb fuses, in a draughty, ill-lit workshop where the knocking of
hammers mingled drearily with the music of the telescreens.

When they met in the church tower the gaps in their fragmentary
conversation were filled up. It was a blazing afternoon. The air in the
little square chamber above the bells was hot and stagnant, and smelt
overpoweringly of pigeon dung. They sat talking for hours on the dusty,
twig-littered floor, one or other of them getting up from time to time to
cast a glance through the arrowslits and make sure that no one was coming.

Julia was twenty-six years old. She lived in a hostel with thirty other
girls ('Always in the stink of women! How I hate women!' she said
parenthetically), and she worked, as he had guessed, on the novel-writing
machines in the Fiction Department. She enjoyed her work, which consisted
chiefly in running and servicing a powerful but tricky electric motor.
She was 'not clever', but was fond of using her hands and felt at home
with machinery. She could describe the whole process of composing a novel,
from the general directive issued by the Planning Committee down to the
final touching-up by the Rewrite Squad. But she was not interested in the
finished product. She 'didn't much care for reading,' she said. Books were
just a commodity that had to be produced, like jam or bootlaces.

She had no memories of anything before the early sixties and the only
person she had ever known who talked frequently of the days before the
Revolution was a grandfather who had disappeared when she was eight. At
school she had been captain of the hockey team and had won the gymnastics
trophy two years running. She had been a troop-leader in the Spies and a
branch secretary in the Youth League before joining the Junior Anti-Sex
League. She had always borne an excellent character. She had even (an
infallible mark of good reputation) been picked out to work in Pornosec,
the sub-section of the Fiction Department which turned out cheap
pornography for distribution among the proles. It was nicknamed Muck House
by the people who worked in it, she remarked. There she had remained for
a year, helping to produce booklets in sealed packets with titles like
'Spanking Stories' or 'One Night in a Girls' School', to be bought
furtively by proletarian youths who were under the impression that they
were buying something illegal.

'What are these books like?' said Winston curiously.

'Oh, ghastly rubbish. They're boring, really. They only have six plots,
but they swap them round a bit. Of course I was only on the kaleidoscopes.
I was never in the Rewrite Squad. I'm not literary, dear--not even enough
for that.'

He learned with astonishment that all the workers in Pornosec, except the
heads of the departments, were girls. The theory was that men, whose sex
instincts were less controllable than those of women, were in greater
danger of being corrupted by the filth they handled.

'They don't even like having married women there,' she added. Girls are
always supposed to be so pure. Here's one who isn't, anyway.

She had had her first love-affair when she was sixteen, with a Party member
of sixty who later committed suicide to avoid arrest. 'And a good job too,'
said Julia, 'otherwise they'd have had my name out of him when he
confessed.' Since then there had been various others. Life as she saw it
was quite simple. You wanted a good time; 'they', meaning the Party,
wanted to stop you having it; you broke the rules as best you could. She
seemed to think it just as natural that 'they' should want to rob you of
your pleasures as that you should want to avoid being caught. She hated
the Party, and said so in the crudest words, but she made no general
criticism of it. Except where it touched upon her own life she had no
interest in Party doctrine. He noticed that she never used Newspeak words
except the ones that had passed into everyday use. She had never heard of
the Brotherhood, and refused to believe in its existence. Any kind of
organized revolt against the Party, which was bound to be a failure,
struck her as stupid. The clever thing was to break the rules and stay
alive all the same. He wondered vaguely how many others like her there
might be in the younger generation people who had grown up in the world of
the Revolution, knowing nothing else, accepting the Party as something
unalterable, like the sky, not rebelling against its authority but simply
evading it, as a rabbit dodges a dog.

They did not discuss the possibility of getting married. It was too remote
to be worth thinking about. No imaginable committee would ever sanction
such a marriage even if Katharine, Winston's wife, could somehow have been
got rid of. It was hopeless even as a daydream.

'What was she like, your wife?' said Julia.

'She was--do you know the Newspeak word GOODTHINKFUL? Meaning naturally
orthodox, incapable of thinking a bad thought?'

'No, I didn't know the word, but I know the kind of person, right enough.'

He began telling her the story of his married life, but curiously enough
she appeared to know the essential parts of it already. She described
to him, almost as though she had seen or felt it, the stiffening of
Katharine's body as soon as he touched her, the way in which she still
seemed to be pushing him from her with all her strength, even when her
arms were clasped tightly round him. With Julia he felt no difficulty in
talking about such things: Katharine, in any case, had long ceased to be
a painful memory and became merely a distasteful one.

'I could have stood it if it hadn't been for one thing,' he said. He told
her about the frigid little ceremony that Katharine had forced him to go
through on the same night every week. 'She hated it, but nothing would
make her stop doing it. She used to call it--but you'll never guess.'

'Our duty to the Party,' said Julia promptly.

'How did you know that?'

'I've been at school too, dear. Sex talks once a month for the
over-sixteens. And in the Youth Movement. They rub it into you for years.
I dare say it works in a lot of cases. But of course you can never tell;
people are such hypocrites.'

She began to enlarge upon the subject. With Julia, everything came back
to her own sexuality. As soon as this was touched upon in any way she was
capable of great acuteness. Unlike Winston, she had grasped the inner
meaning of the Party's sexual puritanism. It was not merely that the sex
instinct created a world of its own which was outside the Party's control
and which therefore had to be destroyed if possible. What was more
important was that sexual privation induced hysteria, which was desirable
because it could be transformed into war-fever and leader-worship. The way
she put it was:

'When you make love you're using up energy; and afterwards you feel happy
and don't give a damn for anything. They can't bear you to feel like that.
They want you to be bursting with energy all the time. All this marching
up and down and cheering and waving flags is simply sex gone sour. If
you're happy inside yourself, why should you get excited about Big Brother
and the Three-Year Plans and the Two Minutes Hate and all the rest of
their bloody rot?'

That was very true, he thought. There was a direct intimate connexion
between chastity and political orthodoxy. For how could the fear, the
hatred, and the lunatic credulity which the Party needed in its members be
kept at the right pitch, except by bottling down some powerful instinct
and using it as a driving force? The sex impulse was dangerous to the
Party, and the Party had turned it to account. They had played a similar
trick with the instinct of parenthood. The family could not actually be
abolished, and, indeed, people were encouraged to be fond of their
children, in almost the old-fashioned way. The children, on the other hand,
were systematically turned against their parents and taught to spy on them
and report their deviations. The family had become in effect an extension
of the Thought Police. It was a device by means of which everyone could be
surrounded night and day by informers who knew him intimately.

Abruptly his mind went back to Katharine. Katharine would unquestionably
have denounced him to the Thought Police if she had not happened to be too
stupid to detect the unorthodoxy of his opinions. But what really recalled
her to him at this moment was the stifling heat of the afternoon, which
had brought the sweat out on his forehead. He began telling Julia of
something that had happened, or rather had failed to happen, on another
sweltering summer afternoon, eleven years ago.

It was three or four months after they were married. They had lost their
way on a community hike somewhere in Kent. They had only lagged behind
the others for a couple of minutes, but they took a wrong turning, and
presently found themselves pulled up short by the edge of an old chalk
quarry. It was a sheer drop of ten or twenty metres, with boulders at the
bottom. There was nobody of whom they could ask the way. As soon as she
realized that they were lost Katharine became very uneasy. To be away
from the noisy mob of hikers even for a moment gave her a feeling of
wrong-doing. She wanted to hurry back by the way they had come and start
searching in the other direction. But at this moment Winston noticed some
tufts of loosestrife growing in the cracks of the cliff beneath them.
One tuft was of two colours, magenta and brick-red, apparently growing on
the same root. He had never seen anything of the kind before, and he called
to Katharine to come and look at it.

'Look, Katharine! Look at those flowers. That clump down near the bottom.
Do you see they're two different colours?'

She had already turned to go, but she did rather fretfully come back for
a moment. She even leaned out over the cliff face to see where he was
pointing. He was standing a little behind her, and he put his hand on
her waist to steady her. At this moment it suddenly occurred to him how
completely alone they were. There was not a human creature anywhere, not a
leaf stirring, not even a bird awake. In a place like this the danger that
there would be a hidden microphone was very small, and even if there was a
microphone it would only pick up sounds. It was the hottest sleepiest hour
of the afternoon. The sun blazed down upon them, the sweat tickled his
face. And the thought struck him...

'Why didn't you give her a good shove?' said Julia. 'I would have.'

'Yes, dear, you would have. I would, if I'd been the same person then as
I am now. Or perhaps I would--I'm not certain.'

'Are you sorry you didn't?'

'Yes. On the whole I'm sorry I didn't.'

They were sitting side by side on the dusty floor. He pulled her closer
against him. Her head rested on his shoulder, the pleasant smell of her
hair conquering the pigeon dung. She was very young, he thought, she
still expected something from life, she did not understand that to push
an inconvenient person over a cliff solves nothing.

'Actually it would have made no difference,' he said.

'Then why are you sorry you didn't do it?'

'Only because I prefer a positive to a negative. In this game that we're
playing, we can't win. Some kinds of failure are better than other kinds,
that's all.'

He felt her shoulders give a wriggle of dissent. She always contradicted
him when he said anything of this kind. She would not accept it as a law
of nature that the individual is always defeated. In a way she realized
that she herself was doomed, that sooner or later the Thought Police would
catch her and kill her, but with another part of her mind she believed
that it was somehow possible to construct a secret world in which you could
live as you chose. All you needed was luck and cunning and boldness. She
did not understand that there was no such thing as happiness, that the
only victory lay in the far future, long after you were dead, that from
the moment of declaring war on the Party it was better to think of yourself
as a corpse.

'We are the dead,' he said.

'We're not dead yet,' said Julia prosaically.

'Not physically. Six months, a year--five years, conceivably. I am afraid
of death. You are young, so presumably you're more afraid of it than I am.
Obviously we shall put it off as long as we can. But it makes very little
difference. So long as human beings stay human, death and life are the
same thing.'

'Oh, rubbish! Which would you sooner sleep with, me or a skeleton? Don't
you enjoy being alive? Don't you like feeling: This is me, this is my hand,
this is my leg, I'm real, I'm solid, I'm alive! Don't you like THIS?'

She twisted herself round and pressed her bosom against him. He could feel
her breasts, ripe yet firm, through her overalls. Her body seemed to be
pouring some of its youth and vigour into his.

'Yes, I like that,' he said.

'Then stop talking about dying. And now listen, dear, we've got to fix
up about the next time we meet. We may as well go back to the place in
the wood. We've given it a good long rest. But you must get there by a
different way this time. I've got it all planned out. You take the
train--but look, I'll draw it out for you.'

And in her practical way she scraped together a small square of dust,
and with a twig from a pigeon's nest began drawing a map on the floor.




Chapter 4



Winston looked round the shabby little room above Mr Charrington's shop.
Beside the window the enormous bed was made up, with ragged blankets and
a coverless bolster. The old-fashioned clock with the twelve-hour face was
ticking away on the mantelpiece. In the corner, on the gateleg table, the
glass paperweight which he had bought on his last visit gleamed softly out
of the half-darkness.

In the fender was a battered tin oilstove, a saucepan, and two cups,
provided by Mr Charrington. Winston lit the burner and set a pan of water
to boil. He had brought an envelope full of Victory Coffee and some
saccharine tablets. The clock's hands said seventeen-twenty: it was
nineteen-twenty really. She was coming at nineteen-thirty.

Folly, folly, his heart kept saying: conscious, gratuitous, suicidal folly.
Of all the crimes that a Party member could commit, this one was the least
possible to conceal. Actually the idea had first floated into his head in
the form of a vision, of the glass paperweight mirrored by the surface
of the gateleg table. As he had foreseen, Mr Charrington had made no
difficulty about letting the room. He was obviously glad of the few dollars
that it would bring him. Nor did he seem shocked or become offensively
knowing when it was made clear that Winston wanted the room for the purpose
of a love-affair. Instead he looked into the middle distance and spoke in
generalities, with so delicate an air as to give the impression that he
had become partly invisible. Privacy, he said, was a very valuable thing.
Everyone wanted a place where they could be alone occasionally. And when
they had such a place, it was only common courtesy in anyone else who knew
of it to keep his knowledge to himself. He even, seeming almost to fade
out of existence as he did so, added that there were two entries to the
house, one of them through the back yard, which gave on an alley.

Under the window somebody was singing. Winston peeped out, secure in the
protection of the muslin curtain. The June sun was still high in the sky,
and in the sun-filled court below, a monstrous woman, solid as a Norman
pillar, with brawny red forearms and a sacking apron strapped about her
middle, was stumping to and fro between a washtub and a clothes line,
pegging out a series of square white things which Winston recognized as
babies' diapers. Whenever her mouth was not corked with clothes pegs she
was singing in a powerful contralto:


  It was only an 'opeless fancy.
  It passed like an Ipril dye,
  But a look an' a word an' the dreams they stirred!
  They 'ave stolen my 'eart awye!


The tune had been haunting London for weeks past. It was one of countless
similar songs published for the benefit of the proles by a sub-section of
the Music Department. The words of these songs were composed without any
human intervention whatever on an instrument known as a versificator.
But the woman sang so tunefully as to turn the dreadful rubbish into an
almost pleasant sound. He could hear the woman singing and the scrape of
her shoes on the flagstones, and the cries of the children in the street,
and somewhere in the far distance a faint roar of traffic, and yet the
room seemed curiously silent, thanks to the absence of a telescreen.

Folly, folly, folly! he thought again. It was inconceivable that they could
frequent this place for more than a few weeks without being caught. But
the temptation of having a hiding-place that was truly their own, indoors
and near at hand, had been too much for both of them. For some time
after their visit to the church belfry it had been impossible to arrange
meetings. Working hours had been drastically increased in anticipation of
Hate Week. It was more than a month distant, but the enormous, complex
preparations that it entailed were throwing extra work on to everybody.
Finally both of them managed to secure a free afternoon on the same day.
They had agreed to go back to the clearing in the wood. On the evening
beforehand they met briefly in the street. As usual, Winston hardly looked
at Julia as they drifted towards one another in the crowd, but from the
short glance he gave her it seemed to him that she was paler than usual.

'It's all off,' she murmured as soon as she judged it safe to speak.
'Tomorrow, I mean.'

'What?'

'Tomorrow afternoon. I can't come.'

'Why not?'

'Oh, the usual reason. It's started early this time.'

For a moment he was violently angry. During the month that he had known
her the nature of his desire for her had changed. At the beginning there
had been little true sensuality in it. Their first love-making had been
simply an act of the will. But after the second time it was different. The
smell of her hair, the taste of her mouth, the feeling of her skin seemed
to have got inside him, or into the air all round him. She had become a
physical necessity, something that he not only wanted but felt that he
had a right to. When she said that she could not come, he had the feeling
that she was cheating him. But just at this moment the crowd pressed
them together and their hands accidentally met. She gave the tips of his
fingers a quick squeeze that seemed to invite not desire but affection. It
struck him that when one lived with a woman this particular disappointment
must be a normal, recurring event; and a deep tenderness, such as he had
not felt for her before, suddenly took hold of him. He wished that they
were a married couple of ten years' standing. He wished that he were
walking through the streets with her just as they were doing now but openly
and without fear, talking of trivialities and buying odds and ends for the
household. He wished above all that they had some place where they could
be alone together without feeling the obligation to make love every time
they met. It was not actually at that moment, but at some time on the
following day, that the idea of renting Mr Charrington's room had occurred
to him. When he suggested it to Julia she had agreed with unexpected
readiness. Both of them knew that it was lunacy. It was as though they were
intentionally stepping nearer to their graves. As he sat waiting on the
edge of the bed he thought again of the cellars of the Ministry of Love.
It was curious how that predestined horror moved in and out of one's
consciousness. There it lay, fixed in future times, preceding death as
surely as 99 precedes 100. One could not avoid it, but one could perhaps
postpone it: and yet instead, every now and again, by a conscious, wilful
act, one chose to shorten the interval before it happened.

At this moment there was a quick step on the stairs. Julia burst into the
room. She was carrying a tool-bag of coarse brown canvas, such as he had
sometimes seen her carrying to and fro at the Ministry. He started forward
to take her in his arms, but she disengaged herself rather hurriedly,
partly because she was still holding the tool-bag.

'Half a second,' she said. 'Just let me show you what I've brought. Did
you bring some of that filthy Victory Coffee? I thought you would. You
can chuck it away again, because we shan't be needing it. Look here.'

She fell on her knees, threw open the bag, and tumbled out some spanners
and a screwdriver that filled the top part of it. Underneath were a number
of neat paper packets. The first packet that she passed to Winston had a
strange and yet vaguely familiar feeling. It was filled with some kind of
heavy, sand-like stuff which yielded wherever you touched it.

'It isn't sugar?' he said.

'Real sugar. Not saccharine, sugar. And here's a loaf of bread--proper
white bread, not our bloody stuff--and a little pot of jam. And here's a
tin of milk--but look! This is the one I'm really proud of. I had to wrap
a bit of sacking round it, because----'

But she did not need to tell him why she had wrapped it up. The smell was
already filling the room, a rich hot smell which seemed like an emanation
from his early childhood, but which one did occasionally meet with even
now, blowing down a passage-way before a door slammed, or diffusing itself
mysteriously in a crowded street, sniffed for an instant and then lost
again.

'It's coffee,' he murmured, 'real coffee.'

'It's Inner Party coffee. There's a whole kilo here,' she said.

'How did you manage to get hold of all these things?'

'It's all Inner Party stuff. There's nothing those swine don't have,
nothing. But of course waiters and servants and people pinch things,
and--look, I got a little packet of tea as well.'

Winston had squatted down beside her. He tore open a corner of the packet.

'It's real tea. Not blackberry leaves.'

'There's been a lot of tea about lately. They've captured India, or
something,' she said vaguely. 'But listen, dear. I want you to turn your
back on me for three minutes. Go and sit on the other side of the bed.
Don't go too near the window. And don't turn round till I tell you.'

Winston gazed abstractedly through the muslin curtain. Down in the yard
the red-armed woman was still marching to and fro between the washtub and
the line. She took two more pegs out of her mouth and sang with deep
feeling:


  They sye that time 'eals all things,
  They sye you can always forget;
  But the smiles an' the tears acrorss the years
  They twist my 'eart-strings yet!


She knew the whole drivelling song by heart, it seemed. Her voice floated
upward with the sweet summer air, very tuneful, charged with a sort of
happy melancholy. One had the feeling that she would have been perfectly
content, if the June evening had been endless and the supply of clothes
inexhaustible, to remain there for a thousand years, pegging out diapers
and singing rubbish. It struck him as a curious fact that he had never
heard a member of the Party singing alone and spontaneously. It would even
have seemed slightly unorthodox, a dangerous eccentricity, like talking to
oneself. Perhaps it was only when people were somewhere near the starvation
level that they had anything to sing about.

'You can turn round now,' said Julia.

He turned round, and for a second almost failed to recognize her. What he
had actually expected was to see her naked. But she was not naked. The
transformation that had happened was much more surprising than that. She
had painted her face.

She must have slipped into some shop in the proletarian quarters and bought
herself a complete set of make-up materials. Her lips were deeply reddened,
her cheeks rouged, her nose powdered; there was even a touch of something
under the eyes to make them brighter. It was not very skilfully done, but
Winston's standards in such matters were not high. He had never before
seen or imagined a woman of the Party with cosmetics on her face. The
improvement in her appearance was startling. With just a few dabs of colour
in the right places she had become not only very much prettier, but, above
all, far more feminine. Her short hair and boyish overalls merely added
to the effect. As he took her in his arms a wave of synthetic violets
flooded his nostrils. He remembered the half-darkness of a basement
kitchen, and a woman's cavernous mouth. It was the very same scent that
she had used; but at the moment it did not seem to matter.

'Scent too!' he said.

'Yes, dear, scent too. And do you know what I'm going to do next? I'm
going to get hold of a real woman's frock from somewhere and wear it
instead of these bloody trousers. I'll wear silk stockings and high-heeled
shoes! In this room I'm going to be a woman, not a Party comrade.'

They flung their clothes off and climbed into the huge mahogany bed. It
was the first time that he had stripped himself naked in her presence.
Until now he had been too much ashamed of his pale and meagre body, with
the varicose veins standing out on his calves and the discoloured patch
over his ankle. There were no sheets, but the blanket they lay on was
threadbare and smooth, and the size and springiness of the bed astonished
both of them. 'It's sure to be full of bugs, but who cares?' said Julia.
One never saw a double bed nowadays, except in the homes of the proles.
Winston had occasionally slept in one in his boyhood: Julia had never been
in one before, so far as she could remember.

Presently they fell asleep for a little while. When Winston woke up the
hands of the clock had crept round to nearly nine. He did not stir, because
Julia was sleeping with her head in the crook of his arm. Most of her
make-up had transferred itself to his own face or the bolster, but a light
stain of rouge still brought out the beauty of her cheekbone. A yellow ray
from the sinking sun fell across the foot of the bed and lighted up the
fireplace, where the water in the pan was boiling fast. Down in the yard
the woman had stopped singing, but the faint shouts of children floated in
from the street. He wondered vaguely whether in the abolished past it had
been a normal experience to lie in bed like this, in the cool of a summer
evening, a man and a woman with no clothes on, making love when they chose,
talking of what they chose, not feeling any compulsion to get up, simply
lying there and listening to peaceful sounds outside. Surely there could
never have been a time when that seemed ordinary? Julia woke up, rubbed
her eyes, and raised herself on her elbow to look at the oilstove.

'Half that water's boiled away,' she said. 'I'll get up and make some
coffee in another moment. We've got an hour. What time do they cut the
lights off at your flats?'

'Twenty-three thirty.'

'It's twenty-three at the hostel. But you have to get in earlier than that,
because--Hi! Get out, you filthy brute!'

She suddenly twisted herself over in the bed, seized a shoe from the floor,
and sent it hurtling into the corner with a boyish jerk of her arm, exactly
as he had seen her fling the dictionary at Goldstein, that morning during
the Two Minutes Hate.

'What was it?' he said in surprise.

'A rat. I saw him stick his beastly nose out of the wainscoting. There's a
hole down there. I gave him a good fright, anyway.'

'Rats!' murmured Winston. 'In this room!'

'They're all over the place,' said Julia indifferently as she lay down
again. 'We've even got them in the kitchen at the hostel. Some parts of
London are swarming with them. Did you know they attack children? Yes,
they do. In some of these streets a woman daren't leave a baby alone for
two minutes. It's the great huge brown ones that do it. And the nasty
thing is that the brutes always----'

'DON'T GO ON!' said Winston, with his eyes tightly shut.

'Dearest! You've gone quite pale. What's the matter? Do they make you feel
sick?'

'Of all horrors in the world--a rat!'

She pressed herself against him and wound her limbs round him, as though
to reassure him with the warmth of her body. He did not reopen his eyes
immediately. For several moments he had had the feeling of being back in a
nightmare which had recurred from time to time throughout his life. It was
always very much the same. He was standing in front of a wall of darkness,
and on the other side of it there was something unendurable, something too
dreadful to be faced. In the dream his deepest feeling was always one of
self-deception, because he did in fact know what was behind the wall of
darkness. With a deadly effort, like wrenching a piece out of his own
brain, he could even have dragged the thing into the open. He always woke
up without discovering what it was: but somehow it was connected with what
Julia had been saying when he cut her short.

'I'm sorry,' he said, 'it's nothing. I don't like rats, that's all.'

'Don't worry, dear, we're not going to have the filthy brutes in here.
I'll stuff the hole with a bit of sacking before we go. And next time we
come here I'll bring some plaster and bung it up properly.'

Already the black instant of panic was half-forgotten. Feeling slightly
ashamed of himself, he sat up against the bedhead. Julia got out of bed,
pulled on her overalls, and made the coffee. The smell that rose from the
saucepan was so powerful and exciting that they shut the window lest
anybody outside should notice it and become inquisitive. What was even
better than the taste of the coffee was the silky texture given to it by
the sugar, a thing Winston had almost forgotten after years of saccharine.
With one hand in her pocket and a piece of bread and jam in the other,
Julia wandered about the room, glancing indifferently at the bookcase,
pointing out the best way of repairing the gateleg table, plumping herself
down in the ragged arm-chair to see if it was comfortable, and examining
the absurd twelve-hour clock with a sort of tolerant amusement. She brought
the glass paperweight over to the bed to have a look at it in a better
light. He took it out of her hand, fascinated, as always, by the soft,
rainwatery appearance of the glass.

'What is it, do you think?' said Julia.

'I don't think it's anything--I mean, I don't think it was ever put to any
use. That's what I like about it. It's a little chunk of history that
they've forgotten to alter. It's a message from a hundred years ago, if
one knew how to read it.'

'And that picture over there'--she nodded at the engraving on the opposite
wall--'would that be a hundred years old?'

'More. Two hundred, I dare say. One can't tell. It's impossible to discover
the age of anything nowadays.'

She went over to look at it. 'Here's where that brute stuck his nose out,'
she said, kicking the wainscoting immediately below the picture. 'What is
this place? I've seen it before somewhere.'

'It's a church, or at least it used to be. St Clement Danes its name was.'
The fragment of rhyme that Mr Charrington had taught him came back into
his head, and he added half-nostalgically: "Oranges and lemons, say the
bells of St Clement's!"

To his astonishment she capped the line:


  'You owe me three farthings, say the bells of St Martin's,
  When will you pay me? say the bells of Old Bailey----'


'I can't remember how it goes on after that. But anyway I remember it ends
up, "Here comes a candle to light you to bed, here comes a chopper to chop
off your head!"'

It was like the two halves of a countersign. But there must be another
line after 'the bells of Old Bailey'. Perhaps it could be dug out of
Mr Charrington's memory, if he were suitably prompted.

'Who taught you that?' he said.

'My grandfather. He used to say it to me when I was a little girl. He was
vaporized when I was eight--at any rate, he disappeared. I wonder what a
lemon was,' she added inconsequently. 'I've seen oranges. They're a kind
of round yellow fruit with a thick skin.'

'I can remember lemons,' said Winston. 'They were quite common in the
fifties. They were so sour that it set your teeth on edge even to smell
them.'

'I bet that picture's got bugs behind it,' said Julia. 'I'll take it down
and give it a good clean some day. I suppose it's almost time we were
leaving. I must start washing this paint off. What a bore! I'll get the
lipstick off your face afterwards.'

Winston did not get up for a few minutes more. The room was darkening. He
turned over towards the light and lay gazing into the glass paperweight.
The inexhaustibly interesting thing was not the fragment of coral but the
interior of the glass itself. There was such a depth of it, and yet it was
almost as transparent as air. It was as though the surface of the glass
had been the arch of the sky, enclosing a tiny world with its atmosphere
complete. He had the feeling that he could get inside it, and that in
fact he was inside it, along with the mahogany bed and the gateleg table,
and the clock and the steel engraving and the paperweight itself. The
paperweight was the room he was in, and the coral was Julia's life and his
own, fixed in a sort of eternity at the heart of the crystal.




Chapter 5



Syme had vanished. A morning came, and he was missing from work: a few
thoughtless people commented on his absence. On the next day nobody
mentioned him. On the third day Winston went into the vestibule of the
Records Department to look at the notice-board. One of the notices carried
a printed list of the members of the Chess Committee, of whom Syme had
been one. It looked almost exactly as it had looked before--nothing had
been crossed out--but it was one name shorter. It was enough. Syme had
ceased to exist: he had never existed.

The weather was baking hot. In the labyrinthine Ministry the windowless,
air-conditioned rooms kept their normal temperature, but outside the
pavements scorched one's feet and the stench of the Tubes at the rush hours
was a horror. The preparations for Hate Week were in full swing, and the
staffs of all the Ministries were working overtime. Processions, meetings,
military parades, lectures, waxworks, displays, film shows, telescreen
programmes all had to be organized; stands had to be erected, effigies
built, slogans coined, songs written, rumours circulated, photographs
faked. Julia's unit in the Fiction Department had been taken off the
production of novels and was rushing out a series of atrocity pamphlets.
Winston, in addition to his regular work, spent long periods every day in
going through back files of 'The Times' and altering and embellishing news
items which were to be quoted in speeches. Late at night, when crowds of
rowdy proles roamed the streets, the town had a curiously febrile air. The
rocket bombs crashed oftener than ever, and sometimes in the far distance
there were enormous explosions which no one could explain and about which
there were wild rumours.

The new tune which was to be the theme-song of Hate Week (the Hate Song,
it was called) had already been composed and was being endlessly plugged
on the telescreens. It had a savage, barking rhythm which could not exactly
be called music, but resembled the beating of a drum. Roared out by
hundreds of voices to the tramp of marching feet, it was terrifying. The
proles had taken a fancy to it, and in the midnight streets it competed
with the still-popular 'It was only a hopeless fancy'. The Parsons children
played it at all hours of the night and day, unbearably, on a comb and a
piece of toilet paper. Winston's evenings were fuller than ever. Squads of
volunteers, organized by Parsons, were preparing the street for Hate Week,
stitching banners, painting posters, erecting flagstaffs on the roofs, and
perilously slinging wires across the street for the reception of streamers.
Parsons boasted that Victory Mansions alone would display four hundred
metres of bunting. He was in his native element and as happy as a lark.
The heat and the manual work had even given him a pretext for reverting
to shorts and an open shirt in the evenings. He was everywhere at once,
pushing, pulling, sawing, hammering, improvising, jollying everyone along
with comradely exhortations and giving out from every fold of his body what
seemed an inexhaustible supply of acrid-smelling sweat.

A new poster had suddenly appeared all over London. It had no caption,
and represented simply the monstrous figure of a Eurasian soldier, three
or four metres high, striding forward with expressionless Mongolian face
and enormous boots, a submachine gun pointed from his hip. From whatever
angle you looked at the poster, the muzzle of the gun, magnified by the
foreshortening, seemed to be pointed straight at you. The thing had been
plastered on every blank space on every wall, even outnumbering the
portraits of Big Brother. The proles, normally apathetic about the war,
were being lashed into one of their periodical frenzies of patriotism.
As though to harmonize with the general mood, the rocket bombs had been
killing larger numbers of people than usual. One fell on a crowded film
theatre in Stepney, burying several hundred victims among the ruins. The
whole population of the neighbourhood turned out for a long, trailing
funeral which went on for hours and was in effect an indignation meeting.
Another bomb fell on a piece of waste ground which was used as a playground
and several dozen children were blown to pieces. There were further angry
demonstrations, Goldstein was burned in effigy, hundreds of copies of the
poster of the Eurasian soldier were torn down and added to the flames, and
a number of shops were looted in the turmoil; then a rumour flew round
that spies were directing the rocket bombs by means of wireless waves, and
an old couple who were suspected of being of foreign extraction had their
house set on fire and perished of suffocation.

In the room over Mr Charrington's shop, when they could get there, Julia
and Winston lay side by side on a stripped bed under the open window,
naked for the sake of coolness. The rat had never come back, but the bugs
had multiplied hideously in the heat. It did not seem to matter. Dirty or
clean, the room was paradise. As soon as they arrived they would sprinkle
everything with pepper bought on the black market, tear off their clothes,
and make love with sweating bodies, then fall asleep and wake to find that
the bugs had rallied and were massing for the counter-attack.

Four, five, six--seven times they met during the month of June. Winston
had dropped his habit of drinking gin at all hours. He seemed to have lost
the need for it. He had grown fatter, his varicose ulcer had subsided,
leaving only a brown stain on the skin above his ankle, his fits of
coughing in the early morning had stopped. The process of life had ceased
to be intolerable, he had no longer any impulse to make faces at the
telescreen or shout curses at the top of his voice. Now that they had a
secure hiding-place, almost a home, it did not even seem a hardship that
they could only meet infrequently and for a couple of hours at a time.
What mattered was that the room over the junk-shop should exist. To know
that it was there, inviolate, was almost the same as being in it. The room
was a world, a pocket of the past where extinct animals could walk.
Mr Charrington, thought Winston, was another extinct animal. He usually
stopped to talk with Mr Charrington for a few minutes on his way upstairs.
The old man seemed seldom or never to go out of doors, and on the other
hand to have almost no customers. He led a ghostlike existence between the
tiny, dark shop, and an even tinier back kitchen where he prepared his
meals and which contained, among other things, an unbelievably ancient
gramophone with an enormous horn. He seemed glad of the opportunity to
talk. Wandering about among his worthless stock, with his long nose and
thick spectacles and his bowed shoulders in the velvet jacket, he had
always vaguely the air of being a collector rather than a tradesman.
With a sort of faded enthusiasm he would finger this scrap of rubbish or
that--a china bottle-stopper, the painted lid of a broken snuffbox, a
pinchbeck locket containing a strand of some long-dead baby's hair--never
asking that Winston should buy it, merely that he should admire it. To
talk to him was like listening to the tinkling of a worn-out musical-box.
He had dragged out from the corners of his memory some more fragments of
forgotten rhymes. There was one about four and twenty blackbirds, and
another about a cow with a crumpled horn, and another about the death
of poor Cock Robin. 'It just occurred to me you might be interested,' he
would say with a deprecating little laugh whenever he produced a new
fragment. But he could never recall more than a few lines of any one
rhyme.

Both of them knew--in a way, it was never out of their minds that what
was now happening could not last long. There were times when the fact of
impending death seemed as palpable as the bed they lay on, and they would
cling together with a sort of despairing sensuality, like a damned soul
grasping at his last morsel of pleasure when the clock is within five
minutes of striking. But there were also times when they had the illusion
not only of safety but of permanence. So long as they were actually in
this room, they both felt, no harm could come to them. Getting there was
difficult and dangerous, but the room itself was sanctuary. It was as when
Winston had gazed into the heart of the paperweight, with the feeling that
it would be possible to get inside that glassy world, and that once inside
it time could be arrested. Often they gave themselves up to daydreams of
escape. Their luck would hold indefinitely, and they would carry on their
intrigue, just like this, for the remainder of their natural lives. Or
Katharine would die, and by subtle manoeuvrings Winston and Julia would
succeed in getting married. Or they would commit suicide together. Or
they would disappear, alter themselves out of recognition, learn to speak
with proletarian accents, get jobs in a factory and live out their lives
undetected in a back-street. It was all nonsense, as they both knew. In
reality there was no escape. Even the one plan that was practicable,
suicide, they had no intention of carrying out. To hang on from day to day
and from week to week, spinning out a present that had no future, seemed
an unconquerable instinct, just as one's lungs will always draw the next
breath so long as there is air available.

Sometimes, too, they talked of engaging in active rebellion against the
Party, but with no notion of how to take the first step. Even if the
fabulous Brotherhood was a reality, there still remained the difficulty
of finding one's way into it. He told her of the strange intimacy that
existed, or seemed to exist, between himself and O'Brien, and of the
impulse he sometimes felt, simply to walk into O'Brien's presence, announce
that he was the enemy of the Party, and demand his help. Curiously enough,
this did not strike her as an impossibly rash thing to do. She was used to
judging people by their faces, and it seemed natural to her that Winston
should believe O'Brien to be trustworthy on the strength of a single flash
of the eyes. Moreover she took it for granted that everyone, or nearly
everyone, secretly hated the Party and would break the rules if he thought
it safe to do so. But she refused to believe that widespread, organized
opposition existed or could exist. The tales about Goldstein and his
underground army, she said, were simply a lot of rubbish which the Party
had invented for its own purposes and which you had to pretend to believe
in. Times beyond number, at Party rallies and spontaneous demonstrations,
she had shouted at the top of her voice for the execution of people whose
names she had never heard and in whose supposed crimes she had not the
faintest belief. When public trials were happening she had taken her place
in the detachments from the Youth League who surrounded the courts from
morning to night, chanting at intervals 'Death to the traitors!' During
the Two Minutes Hate she always excelled all others in shouting insults
at Goldstein. Yet she had only the dimmest idea of who Goldstein was and
what doctrines he was supposed to represent. She had grown up since the
Revolution and was too young to remember the ideological battles of the
fifties and sixties. Such a thing as an independent political movement was
outside her imagination: and in any case the Party was invincible. It
would always exist, and it would always be the same. You could only rebel
against it by secret disobedience or, at most, by isolated acts of
violence such as killing somebody or blowing something up.

In some ways she was far more acute than Winston, and far less susceptible
to Party propaganda. Once when he happened in some connexion to mention
the war against Eurasia, she startled him by saying casually that in her
opinion the war was not happening. The rocket bombs which fell daily on
London were probably fired by the Government of Oceania itself, 'just to
keep people frightened'. This was an idea that had literally never occurred
to him. She also stirred a sort of envy in him by telling him that during
the Two Minutes Hate her great difficulty was to avoid bursting out
laughing. But she only questioned the teachings of the Party when they
in some way touched upon her own life. Often she was ready to accept
the official mythology, simply because the difference between truth and
falsehood did not seem important to her. She believed, for instance, having
learnt it at school, that the Party had invented aeroplanes. (In his own
schooldays, Winston remembered, in the late fifties, it was only the
helicopter that the Party claimed to have invented; a dozen years later,
when Julia was at school, it was already claiming the aeroplane; one
generation more, and it would be claiming the steam engine.) And when he
told her that aeroplanes had been in existence before he was born and long
before the Revolution, the fact struck her as totally uninteresting. After
all, what did it matter who had invented aeroplanes? It was rather more
of a shock to him when he discovered from some chance remark that she did
not remember that Oceania, four years ago, had been at war with Eastasia
and at peace with Eurasia. It was true that she regarded the whole war as
a sham: but apparently she had not even noticed that the name of the enemy
had changed. 'I thought we'd always been at war with Eurasia,' she said
vaguely. It frightened him a little. The invention of aeroplanes dated
from long before her birth, but the switchover in the war had happened
only four years ago, well after she was grown up. He argued with her about
it for perhaps a quarter of an hour. In the end he succeeded in forcing
her memory back until she did dimly recall that at one time Eastasia and
not Eurasia had been the enemy. But the issue still struck her as
unimportant. 'Who cares?' she said impatiently. 'It's always one bloody
war after another, and one knows the news is all lies anyway.'

Sometimes he talked to her of the Records Department and the impudent
forgeries that he committed there. Such things did not appear to horrify
her. She did not feel the abyss opening beneath her feet at the thought
of lies becoming truths. He told her the story of Jones, Aaronson, and
Rutherford and the momentous slip of paper which he had once held between
his fingers. It did not make much impression on her. At first, indeed, she
failed to grasp the point of the story.

'Were they friends of yours?' she said.

'No, I never knew them. They were Inner Party members. Besides, they were
far older men than I was. They belonged to the old days, before the
Revolution. I barely knew them by sight.'

'Then what was there to worry about? People are being killed off all the
time, aren't they?'

He tried to make her understand. 'This was an exceptional case. It wasn't
just a question of somebody being killed. Do you realize that the past,
starting from yesterday, has been actually abolished? If it survives
anywhere, it's in a few solid objects with no words attached to them, like
that lump of glass there. Already we know almost literally nothing about
the Revolution and the years before the Revolution. Every record has been
destroyed or falsified, every book has been rewritten, every picture has
been repainted, every statue and street and building has been renamed,
every date has been altered. And that process is continuing day by day and
minute by minute. History has stopped. Nothing exists except an endless
present in which the Party is always right. I know, of course, that the
past is falsified, but it would never be possible for me to prove it, even
when I did the falsification myself. After the thing is done, no evidence
ever remains. The only evidence is inside my own mind, and I don't know
with any certainty that any other human being shares my memories. Just in
that one instance, in my whole life, I did possess actual concrete evidence
after the event--years after it.'

'And what good was that?'

'It was no good, because I threw it away a few minutes later. But if the
same thing happened today, I should keep it.'

'Well, I wouldn't!' said Julia. 'I'm quite ready to take risks, but only
for something worth while, not for bits of old newspaper. What could you
have done with it even if you had kept it?'

'Not much, perhaps. But it was evidence. It might have planted a few doubts
here and there, supposing that I'd dared to show it to anybody. I don't
imagine that we can alter anything in our own lifetime. But one can imagine
little knots of resistance springing up here and there--small groups of
people banding themselves together, and gradually growing, and even leaving
a few records behind, so that the next generations can carry on where we
leave off.'

'I'm not interested in the next generation, dear. I'm interested in US.'

'You're only a rebel from the waist downwards,' he told her.

She thought this brilliantly witty and flung her arms round him in delight.

In the ramifications of party doctrine she had not the faintest interest.
Whenever he began to talk of the principles of Ingsoc, doublethink, the
mutability of the past, and the denial of objective reality, and to use
Newspeak words, she became bored and confused and said that she never paid
any attention to that kind of thing. One knew that it was all rubbish, so
why let oneself be worried by it? She knew when to cheer and when to boo,
and that was all one needed. If he persisted in talking of such subjects,
she had a disconcerting habit of falling asleep. She was one of those
people who can go to sleep at any hour and in any position. Talking to her,
he realized how easy it was to present an appearance of orthodoxy while
having no grasp whatever of what orthodoxy meant. In a way, the world-view
of the Party imposed itself most successfully on people incapable of
understanding it. They could be made to accept the most flagrant violations
of reality, because they never fully grasped the enormity of what was
demanded of them, and were not sufficiently interested in public events to
notice what was happening. By lack of understanding they remained sane.
They simply swallowed everything, and what they swallowed did them no harm,
because it left no residue behind, just as a grain of corn will pass
undigested through the body of a bird.




Chapter 6



It had happened at last. The expected message had come. All his life, it
seemed to him, he had been waiting for this to happen.

He was walking down the long corridor at the Ministry and he was almost
at the spot where Julia had slipped the note into his hand when he became
aware that someone larger than himself was walking just behind him. The
person, whoever it was, gave a small cough, evidently as a prelude to
speaking. Winston stopped abruptly and turned. It was O'Brien.

At last they were face to face, and it seemed that his only impulse was
to run away. His heart bounded violently. He would have been incapable of
speaking. O'Brien, however, had continued forward in the same movement,
laying a friendly hand for a moment on Winston's arm, so that the two of
them were walking side by side. He began speaking with the peculiar grave
courtesy that differentiated him from the majority of Inner Party members.

'I had been hoping for an opportunity of talking to you,' he said. 'I was
reading one of your Newspeak articles in 'The Times' the other day. You
take a scholarly interest in Newspeak, I believe?'

Winston had recovered part of his self-possession. 'Hardly scholarly,' he
said. 'I'm only an amateur. It's not my subject. I have never had anything
to do with the actual construction of the language.'

'But you write it very elegantly,' said O'Brien. 'That is not only my own
opinion. I was talking recently to a friend of yours who is certainly an
expert. His name has slipped my memory for the moment.'

Again Winston's heart stirred painfully. It was inconceivable that this
was anything other than a reference to Syme. But Syme was not only dead,
he was abolished, an unperson. Any identifiable reference to him would have
been mortally dangerous. O'Brien's remark must obviously have been intended
as a signal, a codeword. By sharing a small act of thoughtcrime he had
turned the two of them into accomplices. They had continued to stroll
slowly down the corridor, but now O'Brien halted. With the curious,
disarming friendliness that he always managed to put in to the gesture he
resettled his spectacles on his nose. Then he went on:

'What I had really intended to say was that in your article I noticed you
had used two words which have become obsolete. But they have only become
so very recently. Have you seen the tenth edition of the Newspeak
Dictionary?'

'No,' said Winston. 'I didn't think it had been issued yet. We are still
using the ninth in the Records Department.'

'The tenth edition is not due to appear for some months, I believe. But a
few advance copies have been circulated. I have one myself. It might
interest you to look at it, perhaps?'

'Very much so,' said Winston, immediately seeing where this tended.

'Some of the new developments are most ingenious. The reduction in the
number of verbs--that is the point that will appeal to you, I think. Let
me see, shall I send a messenger to you with the dictionary? But I am
afraid I invariably forget anything of that kind. Perhaps you could pick
it up at my flat at some time that suited you? Wait. Let me give you my
address.'

They were standing in front of a telescreen. Somewhat absent-mindedly
O'Brien felt two of his pockets and then produced a small leather-covered
notebook and a gold ink-pencil. Immediately beneath the telescreen, in
such a position that anyone who was watching at the other end of the
instrument could read what he was writing, he scribbled an address, tore
out the page and handed it to Winston.

'I am usually at home in the evenings,' he said. 'If not, my servant will
give you the dictionary.'

He was gone, leaving Winston holding the scrap of paper, which this time
there was no need to conceal. Nevertheless he carefully memorized what was
written on it, and some hours later dropped it into the memory hole along
with a mass of other papers.

They had been talking to one another for a couple of minutes at the most.
There was only one meaning that the episode could possibly have. It had
been contrived as a way of letting Winston know O'Brien's address. This
was necessary, because except by direct enquiry it was never possible to
discover where anyone lived. There were no directories of any kind. 'If
you ever want to see me, this is where I can be found,' was what O'Brien
had been saying to him. Perhaps there would even be a message concealed
somewhere in the dictionary. But at any rate, one thing was certain. The
conspiracy that he had dreamed of did exist, and he had reached the outer
edges of it.

He knew that sooner or later he would obey O'Brien's summons. Perhaps
tomorrow, perhaps after a long delay--he was not certain. What was
happening was only the working-out of a process that had started years
ago. The first step had been a secret, involuntary thought, the second
had been the opening of the diary. He had moved from thoughts to words,
and now from words to actions. The last step was something that would
happen in the Ministry of Love. He had accepted it. The end was contained
in the beginning. But it was frightening: or, more exactly, it was like
a foretaste of death, like being a little less alive. Even while he was
speaking to O'Brien, when the meaning of the words had sunk in, a chilly
shuddering feeling had taken possession of his body. He had the sensation
of stepping into the dampness of a grave, and it was not much better
because he had always known that the grave was there and waiting for him.




Chapter 7



Winston had woken up with his eyes full of tears. Julia rolled sleepily
against him, murmuring something that might have been 'What's the matter?'

'I dreamt--' he began, and stopped short. It was too complex to be put
into words. There was the dream itself, and there was a memory connected
with it that had swum into his mind in the few seconds after waking.

He lay back with his eyes shut, still sodden in the atmosphere of the
dream. It was a vast, luminous dream in which his whole life seemed to
stretch out before him like a landscape on a summer evening after rain.
It had all occurred inside the glass paperweight, but the surface of the
glass was the dome of the sky, and inside the dome everything was flooded
with clear soft light in which one could see into interminable distances.
The dream had also been comprehended by--indeed, in some sense it had
consisted in--a gesture of the arm made by his mother, and made again
thirty years later by the Jewish woman he had seen on the news film,
trying to shelter the small boy from the bullets, before the helicopter
blew them both to pieces.

'Do you know,' he said, 'that until this moment I believed I had murdered
my mother?'

'Why did you murder her?' said Julia, almost asleep.

'I didn't murder her. Not physically.'

In the dream he had remembered his last glimpse of his mother, and within
a few moments of waking the cluster of small events surrounding it had all
come back. It was a memory that he must have deliberately pushed out of
his consciousness over many years. He was not certain of the date, but he
could not have been less than ten years old, possibly twelve, when it had
happened.

His father had disappeared some time earlier, how much earlier he could
not remember. He remembered better the rackety, uneasy circumstances of
the time: the periodical panics about air-raids and the sheltering in Tube
stations, the piles of rubble everywhere, the unintelligible proclamations
posted at street corners, the gangs of youths in shirts all the same
colour, the enormous queues outside the bakeries, the intermittent
machine-gun fire in the distance--above all, the fact that there was
never enough to eat. He remembered long afternoons spent with other boys
in scrounging round dustbins and rubbish heaps, picking out the ribs of
cabbage leaves, potato peelings, sometimes even scraps of stale breadcrust
from which they carefully scraped away the cinders; and also in waiting
for the passing of trucks which travelled over a certain route and were
known to carry cattle feed, and which, when they jolted over the bad
patches in the road, sometimes spilt a few fragments of oil-cake.

When his father disappeared, his mother did not show any surprise or any
violent grief, but a sudden change came over her. She seemed to have
become completely spiritless. It was evident even to Winston that she was
waiting for something that she knew must happen. She did everything that
was needed--cooked, washed, mended, made the bed, swept the floor, dusted
the mantelpiece--always very slowly and with a curious lack of superfluous
motion, like an artist's lay-figure moving of its own accord. Her large
shapely body seemed to relapse naturally into stillness. For hours at a
time she would sit almost immobile on the bed, nursing his young sister,
a tiny, ailing, very silent child of two or three, with a face made simian
by thinness. Very occasionally she would take Winston in her arms and
press him against her for a long time without saying anything. He was
aware, in spite of his youthfulness and selfishness, that this was somehow
connected with the never-mentioned thing that was about to happen.

He remembered the room where they lived, a dark, close-smelling room that
seemed half filled by a bed with a white counterpane. There was a gas ring
in the fender, and a shelf where food was kept, and on the landing outside
there was a brown earthenware sink, common to several rooms. He remembered
his mother's statuesque body bending over the gas ring to stir at something
in a saucepan. Above all he remembered his continuous hunger, and the
fierce sordid battles at mealtimes. He would ask his mother naggingly,
over and over again, why there was not more food, he would shout and storm
at her (he even remembered the tones of his voice, which was beginning to
break prematurely and sometimes boomed in a peculiar way), or he would
attempt a snivelling note of pathos in his efforts to get more than his
share. His mother was quite ready to give him more than his share. She
took it for granted that he, 'the boy', should have the biggest portion;
but however much she gave him he invariably demanded more. At every meal
she would beseech him not to be selfish and to remember that his little
sister was sick and also needed food, but it was no use. He would cry out
with rage when she stopped ladling, he would try to wrench the saucepan
and spoon out of her hands, he would grab bits from his sister's plate.
He knew that he was starving the other two, but he could not help it; he
even felt that he had a right to do it. The clamorous hunger in his belly
seemed to justify him. Between meals, if his mother did not stand guard,
he was constantly pilfering at the wretched store of food on the shelf.

One day a chocolate ration was issued. There had been no such issue for
weeks or months past. He remembered quite clearly that precious little
morsel of chocolate. It was a two-ounce slab (they still talked about
ounces in those days) between the three of them. It was obvious that it
ought to be divided into three equal parts. Suddenly, as though he were
listening to somebody else, Winston heard himself demanding in a loud
booming voice that he should be given the whole piece. His mother told him
not to be greedy. There was a long, nagging argument that went round and
round, with shouts, whines, tears, remonstrances, bargainings. His tiny
sister, clinging to her mother with both hands, exactly like a baby monkey,
sat looking over her shoulder at him with large, mournful eyes. In the
end his mother broke off three-quarters of the chocolate and gave it to
Winston, giving the other quarter to his sister. The little girl took hold
of it and looked at it dully, perhaps not knowing what it was. Winston
stood watching her for a moment. Then with a sudden swift spring he had
snatched the piece of chocolate out of his sister's hand and was fleeing
for the door.

'Winston, Winston!' his mother called after him. 'Come back! Give your
sister back her chocolate!'

He stopped, but did not come back. His mother's anxious eyes were fixed on
his face. Even now he was thinking about the thing, he did not know what
it was that was on the point of happening. His sister, conscious of having
been robbed of something, had set up a feeble wail. His mother drew her
arm round the child and pressed its face against her breast. Something in
the gesture told him that his sister was dying. He turned and fled down
the stairs, with the chocolate growing sticky in his hand.

He never saw his mother again. After he had devoured the chocolate he felt
somewhat ashamed of himself and hung about in the streets for several
hours, until hunger drove him home. When he came back his mother had
disappeared. This was already becoming normal at that time. Nothing was
gone from the room except his mother and his sister. They had not taken
any clothes, not even his mother's overcoat. To this day he did not know
with any certainty that his mother was dead. It was perfectly possible
that she had merely been sent to a forced-labour camp. As for his sister,
she might have been removed, like Winston himself, to one of the colonies
for homeless children (Reclamation Centres, they were called) which had
grown up as a result of the civil war, or she might have been sent to the
labour camp along with his mother, or simply left somewhere or other
to die.

The dream was still vivid in his mind, especially the enveloping protecting
gesture of the arm in which its whole meaning seemed to be contained. His
mind went back to another dream of two months ago. Exactly as his mother
had sat on the dingy white-quilted bed, with the child clinging to her, so
she had sat in the sunken ship, far underneath him, and drowning deeper
every minute, but still looking up at him through the darkening water.

He told Julia the story of his mother's disappearance. Without opening her
eyes she rolled over and settled herself into a more comfortable position.

'I expect you were a beastly little swine in those days,' she said
indistinctly. 'All children are swine.'

'Yes. But the real point of the story----'

From her breathing it was evident that she was going off to sleep again.
He would have liked to continue talking about his mother. He did not
suppose, from what he could remember of her, that she had been an unusual
woman, still less an intelligent one; and yet she had possessed a kind of
nobility, a kind of purity, simply because the standards that she obeyed
were private ones. Her feelings were her own, and could not be altered
from outside. It would not have occurred to her that an action which is
ineffectual thereby becomes meaningless. If you loved someone, you loved
him, and when you had nothing else to give, you still gave him love. When
the last of the chocolate was gone, his mother had clasped the child in
her arms. It was no use, it changed nothing, it did not produce more
chocolate, it did not avert the child's death or her own; but it seemed
natural to her to do it. The refugee woman in the boat had also covered
the little boy with her arm, which was no more use against the bullets
than a sheet of paper. The terrible thing that the Party had done was to
persuade you that mere impulses, mere feelings, were of no account, while
at the same time robbing you of all power over the material world. When
once you were in the grip of the Party, what you felt or did not feel,
what you did or refrained from doing, made literally no difference.
Whatever happened you vanished, and neither you nor your actions were ever
heard of again. You were lifted clean out of the stream of history. And
yet to the people of only two generations ago this would not have seemed
all-important, because they were not attempting to alter history. They
were governed by private loyalties which they did not question. What
mattered were individual relationships, and a completely helpless gesture,
an embrace, a tear, a word spoken to a dying man, could have value in
itself. The proles, it suddenly occurred to him, had remained in this
condition. They were not loyal to a party or a country or an idea, they
were loyal to one another. For the first time in his life he did not
despise the proles or think of them merely as an inert force which would
one day spring to life and regenerate the world. The proles had stayed
human. They had not become hardened inside. They had held on to the
primitive emotions which he himself had to re-learn by conscious effort.
And in thinking this he remembered, without apparent relevance, how a few
weeks ago he had seen a severed hand lying on the pavement and had kicked
it into the gutter as though it had been a cabbage-stalk.

'The proles are human beings,' he said aloud. 'We are not human.'

'Why not?' said Julia, who had woken up again.

He thought for a little while. 'Has it ever occurred to you,' he said,
'that the best thing for us to do would be simply to walk out of here
before it's too late, and never see each other again?'

'Yes, dear, it has occurred to me, several times. But I'm not going to do
it, all the same.'

'We've been lucky,' he said 'but it can't last much longer. You're young.
You look normal and innocent. If you keep clear of people like me, you
might stay alive for another fifty years.'

'No. I've thought it all out. What you do, I'm going to do. And don't be
too downhearted. I'm rather good at staying alive.'

'We may be together for another six months--a year--there's no knowing.
At the end we're certain to be apart. Do you realize how utterly alone we
shall be? When once they get hold of us there will be nothing, literally
nothing, that either of us can do for the other. If I confess, they'll
shoot you, and if I refuse to confess, they'll shoot you just the same.
Nothing that I can do or say, or stop myself from saying, will put off
your death for as much as five minutes. Neither of us will even know
whether the other is alive or dead. We shall be utterly without power of
any kind. The one thing that matters is that we shouldn't betray one
another, although even that can't make the slightest difference.'

'If you mean confessing,' she said, 'we shall do that, right enough.
Everybody always confesses. You can't help it. They torture you.'

'I don't mean confessing. Confession is not betrayal. What you say or do
doesn't matter: only feelings matter. If they could make me stop loving
you--that would be the real betrayal.'

She thought it over. 'They can't do that,' she said finally. 'It's the one
thing they can't do. They can make you say anything--ANYTHING--but they
can't make you believe it. They can't get inside you.'

'No,' he said a little more hopefully, 'no; that's quite true. They can't
get inside you. If you can FEEL that staying human is worth while, even
when it can't have any result whatever, you've beaten them.'

He thought of the telescreen with its never-sleeping ear. They could spy
upon you night and day, but if you kept your head you could still outwit
them. With all their cleverness they had never mastered the secret of
finding out what another human being was thinking. Perhaps that was less
true when you were actually in their hands. One did not know what happened
inside the Ministry of Love, but it was possible to guess: tortures, drugs,
delicate instruments that registered your nervous reactions, gradual
wearing-down by sleeplessness and solitude and persistent questioning.
Facts, at any rate, could not be kept hidden. They could be tracked down
by enquiry, they could be squeezed out of you by torture. But if the object
was not to stay alive but to stay human, what difference did it ultimately
make? They could not alter your feelings: for that matter you could not
alter them yourself, even if you wanted to. They could lay bare in the
utmost detail everything that you had done or said or thought; but the
inner heart, whose workings were mysterious even to yourself, remained
impregnable.




Chapter 8



They had done it, they had done it at last!

The room they were standing in was long-shaped and softly lit. The
telescreen was dimmed to a low murmur; the richness of the dark-blue carpet
gave one the impression of treading on velvet. At the far end of the room
O'Brien was sitting at a table under a green-shaded lamp, with a mass of
papers on either side of him. He had not bothered to look up when the
servant showed Julia and Winston in.

Winston's heart was thumping so hard that he doubted whether he would be
able to speak. They had done it, they had done it at last, was all he
could think. It had been a rash act to come here at all, and sheer folly
to arrive together; though it was true that they had come by different
routes and only met on O'Brien's doorstep. But merely to walk into such a
place needed an effort of the nerve. It was only on very rare occasions
that one saw inside the dwelling-places of the Inner Party, or even
penetrated into the quarter of the town where they lived. The whole
atmosphere of the huge block of flats, the richness and spaciousness of
everything, the unfamiliar smells of good food and good tobacco, the
silent and incredibly rapid lifts sliding up and down, the white-jacketed
servants hurrying to and fro--everything was intimidating. Although he had
a good pretext for coming here, he was haunted at every step by the fear
that a black-uniformed guard would suddenly appear from round the corner,
demand his papers, and order him to get out. O'Brien's servant, however,
had admitted the two of them without demur. He was a small, dark-haired
man in a white jacket, with a diamond-shaped, completely expressionless
face which might have been that of a Chinese. The passage down which he
led them was softly carpeted, with cream-papered walls and white
wainscoting, all exquisitely clean. That too was intimidating. Winston
could not remember ever to have seen a passageway whose walls were not
grimy from the contact of human bodies.

O'Brien had a slip of paper between his fingers and seemed to be studying
it intently. His heavy face, bent down so that one could see the line of
the nose, looked both formidable and intelligent. For perhaps twenty
seconds he sat without stirring. Then he pulled the speakwrite towards
him and rapped out a message in the hybrid jargon of the Ministries:

'Items one comma five comma seven approved fullwise stop suggestion
contained item six doubleplus ridiculous verging crimethink cancel stop
unproceed constructionwise antegetting plusfull estimates machinery
overheads stop end message.'

He rose deliberately from his chair and came towards them across the
soundless carpet. A little of the official atmosphere seemed to have fallen
away from him with the Newspeak words, but his expression was grimmer than
usual, as though he were not pleased at being disturbed. The terror that
Winston already felt was suddenly shot through by a streak of ordinary
embarrassment. It seemed to him quite possible that he had simply made a
stupid mistake. For what evidence had he in reality that O'Brien was any
kind of political conspirator? Nothing but a flash of the eyes and a single
equivocal remark: beyond that, only his own secret imaginings, founded on
a dream. He could not even fall back on the pretence that he had come to
borrow the dictionary, because in that case Julia's presence was impossible
to explain. As O'Brien passed the telescreen a thought seemed to strike
him. He stopped, turned aside and pressed a switch on the wall. There was
a sharp snap. The voice had stopped.

Julia uttered a tiny sound, a sort of squeak of surprise. Even in the midst
of his panic, Winston was too much taken aback to be able to hold his
tongue.

'You can turn it off!' he said.

'Yes,' said O'Brien, 'we can turn it off. We have that privilege.'

He was opposite them now. His solid form towered over the pair of them,
and the expression on his face was still indecipherable. He was waiting,
somewhat sternly, for Winston to speak, but about what? Even now it was
quite conceivable that he was simply a busy man wondering irritably why he
had been interrupted. Nobody spoke. After the stopping of the telescreen
the room seemed deadly silent. The seconds marched past, enormous. With
difficulty Winston continued to keep his eyes fixed on O'Brien's. Then
suddenly the grim face broke down into what might have been the beginnings
of a smile. With his characteristic gesture O'Brien resettled his
spectacles on his nose.

'Shall I say it, or will you?' he said.

'I will say it,' said Winston promptly. 'That thing is really turned off?'

'Yes, everything is turned off. We are alone.'

'We have come here because----'

He paused, realizing for the first time the vagueness of
his own motives. Since he did not in fact know what kind of
help he expected from O'Brien, it was not easy to say why he
had come here. He went on, conscious that what he was saying
must sound both feeble and pretentious:

'We believe that there is some kind of conspiracy, some kind of secret
organization working against the Party, and that you are involved in it.
We want to join it and work for it. We are enemies of the Party. We
disbelieve in the principles of Ingsoc. We are thought-criminals. We are
also adulterers. I tell you this because we want to put ourselves at your
mercy. If you want us to incriminate ourselves in any other way, we are
ready.'

He stopped and glanced over his shoulder, with the feeling that the door
had opened. Sure enough, the little yellow-faced servant had come in
without knocking. Winston saw that he was carrying a tray with a decanter
and glasses.

'Martin is one of us,' said O'Brien impassively. 'Bring the drinks over
here, Martin. Put them on the round table. Have we enough chairs? Then
we may as well sit down and talk in comfort. Bring a chair for yourself,
Martin. This is business. You can stop being a servant for the next ten
minutes.'

The little man sat down, quite at his ease, and yet still with a
servant-like air, the air of a valet enjoying a privilege. Winston
regarded him out of the corner of his eye. It struck him that the man's
whole life was playing a part, and that he felt it to be dangerous to
drop his assumed personality even for a moment. O'Brien took the decanter
by the neck and filled up the glasses with a dark-red liquid. It aroused
in Winston dim memories of something seen long ago on a wall or a
hoarding--a vast bottle composed of electric lights which seemed to move
up and down and pour its contents into a glass. Seen from the top the
stuff looked almost black, but in the decanter it gleamed like a ruby.
It had a sour-sweet smell. He saw Julia pick up her glass and sniff at
it with frank curiosity.

'It is called wine,' said O'Brien with a faint smile. 'You will have read
about it in books, no doubt. Not much of it gets to the Outer Party, I am
afraid.' His face grew solemn again, and he raised his glass: 'I think it
is fitting that we should begin by drinking a health. To our Leader: To
Emmanuel Goldstein.'

Winston took up his glass with a certain eagerness. Wine was a thing he
had read and dreamed about. Like the glass paperweight or Mr Charrington's
half-remembered rhymes, it belonged to the vanished, romantic past, the
olden time as he liked to call it in his secret thoughts. For some reason
he had always thought of wine as having an intensely sweet taste, like
that of blackberry jam and an immediate intoxicating effect. Actually,
when he came to swallow it, the stuff was distinctly disappointing. The
truth was that after years of gin-drinking he could barely taste it. He
set down the empty glass.

'Then there is such a person as Goldstein?' he said.

'Yes, there is such a person, and he is alive. Where, I do not know.'

'And the conspiracy--the organization? Is it real? It is not simply an
invention of the Thought Police?'

'No, it is real. The Brotherhood, we call it. You will never learn much
more about the Brotherhood than that it exists and that you belong to it.
I will come back to that presently.' He looked at his wrist-watch. 'It is
unwise even for members of the Inner Party to turn off the telescreen for
more than half an hour. You ought not to have come here together, and
you will have to leave separately. You, comrade'--he bowed his head to
Julia--'will leave first. We have about twenty minutes at our disposal.
You will understand that I must start by asking you certain questions.
In general terms, what are you prepared to do?'

'Anything that we are capable of,' said Winston.

O'Brien had turned himself a little in his chair so that he was facing
Winston. He almost ignored Julia, seeming to take it for granted that
Winston could speak for her. For a moment the lids flitted down over his
eyes. He began asking his questions in a low, expressionless voice, as
though this were a routine, a sort of catechism, most of whose answers
were known to him already.

'You are prepared to give your lives?'

'Yes.'

'You are prepared to commit murder?'

'Yes.'

'To commit acts of sabotage which may cause the death of hundreds of
innocent people?'

'Yes.'

'To betray your country to foreign powers?'

'Yes.'

'You are prepared to cheat, to forge, to blackmail, to corrupt the minds
of children, to distribute habit-forming drugs, to encourage prostitution,
to disseminate venereal diseases--to do anything which is likely to cause
demoralization and weaken the power of the Party?'

'Yes.'

'If, for example, it would somehow serve our interests to throw sulphuric
acid in a child's face--are you prepared to do that?'

'Yes.'

'You are prepared to lose your identity and live out the rest of your life
as a waiter or a dock-worker?'

'Yes.'

'You are prepared to commit suicide, if and when we order you to do so?'

'Yes.'

'You are prepared, the two of you, to separate and never see one another
again?'

'No!' broke in Julia.

It appeared to Winston that a long time passed before he answered. For a
moment he seemed even to have been deprived of the power of speech. His
tongue worked soundlessly, forming the opening syllables first of one word,
then of the other, over and over again. Until he had said it, he did not
know which word he was going to say. 'No,' he said finally.

'You did well to tell me,' said O'Brien. 'It is necessary for us to know
everything.'

He turned himself toward Julia and added in a voice with somewhat more
expression in it:

'Do you understand that even if he survives, it may be as a different
person? We may be obliged to give him a new identity. His face, his
movements, the shape of his hands, the colour of his hair--even his voice
would be different. And you yourself might have become a different person.
Our surgeons can alter people beyond recognition. Sometimes it is
necessary. Sometimes we even amputate a limb.'

Winston could not help snatching another sidelong glance at Martin's
Mongolian face. There were no scars that he could see. Julia had turned a
shade paler, so that her freckles were showing, but she faced O'Brien
boldly. She murmured something that seemed to be assent.

'Good. Then that is settled.'

There was a silver box of cigarettes on the table. With a rather
absent-minded air O'Brien pushed them towards the others, took one himself,
then stood up and began to pace slowly to and fro, as though he could think
better standing. They were very good cigarettes, very thick and
well-packed, with an unfamiliar silkiness in the paper. O'Brien looked at
his wrist-watch again.

'You had better go back to your Pantry, Martin,' he said. 'I shall switch
on in a quarter of an hour. Take a good look at these comrades' faces
before you go. You will be seeing them again. I may not.'

Exactly as they had done at the front door, the little man's dark eyes
flickered over their faces. There was not a trace of friendliness in his
manner. He was memorizing their appearance, but he felt no interest in
them, or appeared to feel none. It occurred to Winston that a synthetic
face was perhaps incapable of changing its expression. Without speaking
or giving any kind of salutation, Martin went out, closing the door
silently behind him. O'Brien was strolling up and down, one hand in the
pocket of his black overalls, the other holding his cigarette.

'You understand,' he said, 'that you will be fighting in the dark. You
will always be in the dark. You will receive orders and you will obey them,
without knowing why. Later I shall send you a book from which you will
learn the true nature of the society we live in, and the strategy by which
we shall destroy it. When you have read the book, you will be full members
of the Brotherhood. But between the general aims that we are fighting for
and the immediate tasks of the moment, you will never know anything. I
tell you that the Brotherhood exists, but I cannot tell you whether it
numbers a hundred members, or ten million. From your personal knowledge
you will never be able to say that it numbers even as many as a dozen. You
will have three or four contacts, who will be renewed from time to time as
they disappear. As this was your first contact, it will be preserved. When
you receive orders, they will come from me. If we find it necessary to
communicate with you, it will be through Martin. When you are finally
caught, you will confess. That is unavoidable. But you will have very
little to confess, other than your own actions. You will not be able to
betray more than a handful of unimportant people. Probably you will not
even betray me. By that time I may be dead, or I shall have become a
different person, with a different face.'

He continued to move to and fro over the soft carpet. In spite of the
bulkiness of his body there was a remarkable grace in his movements. It
came out even in the gesture with which he thrust a hand into his pocket,
or manipulated a cigarette. More even than of strength, he gave an
impression of confidence and of an understanding tinged by irony. However
much in earnest he might be, he had nothing of the single-mindedness that
belongs to a fanatic. When he spoke of murder, suicide, venereal disease,
amputated limbs, and altered faces, it was with a faint air of persiflage.
'This is unavoidable,' his voice seemed to say; 'this is what we have got
to do, unflinchingly. But this is not what we shall be doing when life is
worth living again.' A wave of admiration, almost of worship, flowed out
from Winston towards O'Brien. For the moment he had forgotten the shadowy
figure of Goldstein. When you looked at O'Brien's powerful shoulders and
his blunt-featured face, so ugly and yet so civilized, it was impossible
to believe that he could be defeated. There was no stratagem that he was
not equal to, no danger that he could not foresee. Even Julia seemed to
be impressed. She had let her cigarette go out and was listening intently.
O'Brien went on:

'You will have heard rumours of the existence of the Brotherhood. No doubt
you have formed your own picture of it. You have imagined, probably, a
huge underworld of conspirators, meeting secretly in cellars, scribbling
messages on walls, recognizing one another by codewords or by special
movements of the hand. Nothing of the kind exists. The members of the
Brotherhood have no way of recognizing one another, and it is impossible
for any one member to be aware of the identity of more than a few others.
Goldstein himself, if he fell into the hands of the Thought Police, could
not give them a complete list of members, or any information that would
lead them to a complete list. No such list exists. The Brotherhood cannot
be wiped out because it is not an organization in the ordinary sense.
Nothing holds it together except an idea which is indestructible. You
will never have anything to sustain you, except the idea. You will get no
comradeship and no encouragement. When finally you are caught, you will
get no help. We never help our members. At most, when it is absolutely
necessary that someone should be silenced, we are occasionally able to
smuggle a razor blade into a prisoner's cell. You will have to get used
to living without results and without hope. You will work for a while,
you will be caught, you will confess, and then you will die. Those are
the only results that you will ever see. There is no possibility that any
perceptible change will happen within our own lifetime. We are the dead.
Our only true life is in the future. We shall take part in it as handfuls
of dust and splinters of bone. But how far away that future may be, there
is no knowing. It might be a thousand years. At present nothing is possible
except to extend the area of sanity little by little. We cannot act
collectively. We can only spread our knowledge outwards from individual to
individual, generation after generation. In the face of the Thought Police
there is no other way.'

He halted and looked for the third time at his wrist-watch.

'It is almost time for you to leave, comrade,' he said to Julia. 'Wait.
The decanter is still half full.'

He filled the glasses and raised his own glass by the stem.

'What shall it be this time?' he said, still with the same faint
suggestion of irony. 'To the confusion of the Thought Police? To the
death of Big Brother? To humanity? To the future?'

'To the past,' said Winston.

'The past is more important,' agreed O'Brien gravely.

They emptied their glasses, and a moment later Julia stood up to go.
O'Brien took a small box from the top of a cabinet and handed her a flat
white tablet which he told her to place on her tongue. It was important,
he said, not to go out smelling of wine: the lift attendants were very
observant. As soon as the door had shut behind her he appeared to forget
her existence. He took another pace or two up and down, then stopped.

'There are details to be settled,' he said. 'I assume that you have a
hiding-place of some kind?'

Winston explained about the room over Mr Charrington's shop.

'That will do for the moment. Later we will arrange something else for you.
It is important to change one's hiding-place frequently. Meanwhile I shall
send you a copy of THE BOOK'--even O'Brien, Winston noticed, seemed to
pronounce the words as though they were in italics--'Goldstein's book, you
understand, as soon as possible. It may be some days before I can get hold
of one. There are not many in existence, as you can imagine. The Thought
Police hunt them down and destroy them almost as fast as we can produce
them. It makes very little difference. The book is indestructible. If
the last copy were gone, we could reproduce it almost word for word. Do
you carry a brief-case to work with you?' he added.

'As a rule, yes.'

'What is it like?'

'Black, very shabby. With two straps.'

'Black, two straps, very shabby--good. One day in the fairly near
future--I cannot give a date--one of the messages among your morning's
work will contain a misprinted word, and you will have to ask for a
repeat. On the following day you will go to work without your brief-case.
At some time during the day, in the street, a man will touch you on the
arm and say "I think you have dropped your brief-case." The one he gives
you will contain a copy of Goldstein's book. You will return it within
fourteen days.'

They were silent for a moment.

'There are a couple of minutes before you need go,' said O'Brien. 'We
shall meet again--if we do meet again----'

Winston looked up at him. 'In the place where there is no darkness?'
he said hesitantly.

O'Brien nodded without appearance of surprise. 'In the place where there
is no darkness,' he said, as though he had recognized the allusion. 'And
in the meantime, is there anything that you wish to say before you leave?
Any message? Any question?.'

Winston thought. There did not seem to be any further question that he
wanted to ask: still less did he feel any impulse to utter high-sounding
generalities. Instead of anything directly connected with O'Brien or the
Brotherhood, there came into his mind a sort of composite picture of the
dark bedroom where his mother had spent her last days, and the little room
over Mr Charrington's shop, and the glass paperweight, and the steel
engraving in its rosewood frame. Almost at random he said:

'Did you ever happen to hear an old rhyme that begins "Oranges and lemons,
say the bells of St Clement's"?'

Again O'Brien nodded. With a sort of grave courtesy he completed the
stanza:


  'Oranges and lemons, say the bells of St Clement's,
  You owe me three farthings, say the bells of St Martin's,
  When will you pay me? say the bells of Old Bailey,
  When I grow rich, say the bells of Shoreditch.'


'You knew the last line!' said Winston.

'Yes, I knew the last line. And now, I am afraid, it is time for you to go.
But wait. You had better let me give you one of these tablets.'

As Winston stood up O'Brien held out a hand. His powerful grip crushed
the bones of Winston's palm. At the door Winston looked back, but O'Brien
seemed already to be in process of putting him out of mind. He was waiting
with his hand on the switch that controlled the telescreen. Beyond him
Winston could see the writing-table with its green-shaded lamp and the
speakwrite and the wire baskets deep-laden with papers. The incident was
closed. Within thirty seconds, it occurred to him, O'Brien would be back
at his interrupted and important work on behalf of the Party.




Chapter 9



Winston was gelatinous with fatigue. Gelatinous was the right word. It had
come into his head spontaneously. His body seemed to have not only the
weakness of a jelly, but its translucency. He felt that if he held up his
hand he would be able to see the light through it. All the blood and
lymph had been drained out of him by an enormous debauch of work, leaving
only a frail structure of nerves, bones, and skin. All sensations seemed
to be magnified. His overalls fretted his shoulders, the pavement tickled
his feet, even the opening and closing of a hand was an effort that made
his joints creak.

He had worked more than ninety hours in five days. So had everyone else in
the Ministry. Now it was all over, and he had literally nothing to do, no
Party work of any description, until tomorrow morning. He could spend six
hours in the hiding-place and another nine in his own bed. Slowly, in
mild afternoon sunshine, he walked up a dingy street in the direction
of Mr Charrington's shop, keeping one eye open for the patrols, but
irrationally convinced that this afternoon there was no danger of anyone
interfering with him. The heavy brief-case that he was carrying bumped
against his knee at each step, sending a tingling sensation up and down
the skin of his leg. Inside it was the book, which he had now had in his
possession for six days and had not yet opened, nor even looked at.

On the sixth day of Hate Week, after the processions, the speeches, the
shouting, the singing, the banners, the posters, the films, the waxworks,
the rolling of drums and squealing of trumpets, the tramp of marching feet,
the grinding of the caterpillars of tanks, the roar of massed planes,
the booming of guns--after six days of this, when the great orgasm was
quivering to its climax and the general hatred of Eurasia had boiled up
into such delirium that if the crowd could have got their hands on the
2,000 Eurasian war-criminals who were to be publicly hanged on the last
day of the proceedings, they would unquestionably have torn them to
pieces--at just this moment it had been announced that Oceania was not
after all at war with Eurasia. Oceania was at war with Eastasia. Eurasia
was an ally.

There was, of course, no admission that any change had taken place. Merely
it became known, with extreme suddenness and everywhere at once, that
Eastasia and not Eurasia was the enemy. Winston was taking part in a
demonstration in one of the central London squares at the moment when it
happened. It was night, and the white faces and the scarlet banners were
luridly floodlit. The square was packed with several thousand people,
including a block of about a thousand schoolchildren in the uniform of the
Spies. On a scarlet-draped platform an orator of the Inner Party, a small
lean man with disproportionately long arms and a large bald skull over
which a few lank locks straggled, was haranguing the crowd. A little
Rumpelstiltskin figure, contorted with hatred, he gripped the neck of the
microphone with one hand while the other, enormous at the end of a bony
arm, clawed the air menacingly above his head. His voice, made metallic by
the amplifiers, boomed forth an endless catalogue of atrocities, massacres,
deportations, lootings, rapings, torture of prisoners, bombing of
civilians, lying propaganda, unjust aggressions, broken treaties. It was
almost impossible to listen to him without being first convinced and then
maddened. At every few moments the fury of the crowd boiled over and the
voice of the speaker was drowned by a wild beast-like roaring that rose
uncontrollably from thousands of throats. The most savage yells of all
came from the schoolchildren. The speech had been proceeding for perhaps
twenty minutes when a messenger hurried on to the platform and a scrap of
paper was slipped into the speaker's hand. He unrolled and read it without
pausing in his speech. Nothing altered in his voice or manner, or in the
content of what he was saying, but suddenly the names were different.
Without words said, a wave of understanding rippled through the crowd.
Oceania was at war with Eastasia! The next moment there was a tremendous
commotion. The banners and posters with which the square was decorated
were all wrong! Quite half of them had the wrong faces on them. It was
sabotage! The agents of Goldstein had been at work! There was a riotous
interlude while posters were ripped from the walls, banners torn to shreds
and trampled underfoot. The Spies performed prodigies of activity in
clambering over the rooftops and cutting the streamers that fluttered from
the chimneys. But within two or three minutes it was all over. The orator,
still gripping the neck of the microphone, his shoulders hunched forward,
his free hand clawing at the air, had gone straight on with his speech.
One minute more, and the feral roars of rage were again bursting from the
crowd. The Hate continued exactly as before, except that the target had
been changed.

The thing that impressed Winston in looking back was that the speaker had
switched from one line to the other actually in midsentence, not only
without a pause, but without even breaking the syntax. But at the moment
he had other things to preoccupy him. It was during the moment of disorder
while the posters were being torn down that a man whose face he did not
see had tapped him on the shoulder and said, 'Excuse me, I think you've
dropped your brief-case.' He took the brief-case abstractedly, without
speaking. He knew that it would be days before he had an opportunity to
look inside it. The instant that the demonstration was over he went
straight to the Ministry of Truth, though the time was now nearly
twenty-three hours. The entire staff of the Ministry had done likewise.
The orders already issuing from the telescreen, recalling them to their
posts, were hardly necessary.

Oceania was at war with Eastasia: Oceania had always been at war with
Eastasia. A large part of the political literature of five years was now
completely obsolete. Reports and records of all kinds, newspapers, books,
pamphlets, films, sound-tracks, photographs--all had to be rectified at
lightning speed. Although no directive was ever issued, it was known that
the chiefs of the Department intended that within one week no reference
to the war with Eurasia, or the alliance with Eastasia, should remain in
existence anywhere. The work was overwhelming, all the more so because
the processes that it involved could not be called by their true
names. Everyone in the Records Department worked eighteen hours in the
twenty-four, with two three-hour snatches of sleep. Mattresses were brought
up from the cellars and pitched all over the corridors: meals consisted of
sandwiches and Victory Coffee wheeled round on trolleys by attendants from
the canteen. Each time that Winston broke off for one of his spells of
sleep he tried to leave his desk clear of work, and each time that he
crawled back sticky-eyed and aching, it was to find that another shower
of paper cylinders had covered the desk like a snowdrift, half-burying the
speakwrite and overflowing on to the floor, so that the first job was
always to stack them into a neat enough pile to give him room to work.
What was worst of all was that the work was by no means purely mechanical.
Often it was enough merely to substitute one name for another, but any
detailed report of events demanded care and imagination. Even the
geographical knowledge that one needed in transferring the war from one
part of the world to another was considerable.

By the third day his eyes ached unbearably and his spectacles needed wiping
every few minutes. It was like struggling with some crushing physical task,
something which one had the right to refuse and which one was nevertheless
neurotically anxious to accomplish. In so far as he had time to remember
it, he was not troubled by the fact that every word he murmured into the
speakwrite, every stroke of his ink-pencil, was a deliberate lie. He was
as anxious as anyone else in the Department that the forgery should be
perfect. On the morning of the sixth day the dribble of cylinders slowed
down. For as much as half an hour nothing came out of the tube; then one
more cylinder, then nothing. Everywhere at about the same time the work
was easing off. A deep and as it were secret sigh went through the
Department. A mighty deed, which could never be mentioned, had been
achieved. It was now impossible for any human being to prove by documentary
evidence that the war with Eurasia had ever happened. At twelve hundred it
was unexpectedly announced that all workers in the Ministry were free till
tomorrow morning. Winston, still carrying the brief-case containing the
book, which had remained between his feet while he worked and under his
body while he slept, went home, shaved himself, and almost fell asleep in
his bath, although the water was barely more than tepid.

With a sort of voluptuous creaking in his joints he climbed the stair above
Mr Charrington's shop. He was tired, but not sleepy any longer. He opened
the window, lit the dirty little oilstove and put on a pan of water for
coffee. Julia would arrive presently: meanwhile there was the book. He
sat down in the sluttish armchair and undid the straps of the brief-case.

A heavy black volume, amateurishly bound, with no name or title on the
cover. The print also looked slightly irregular. The pages were worn at
the edges, and fell apart, easily, as though the book had passed through
many hands. The inscription on the title-page ran:


  THE THEORY AND PRACTICE OF
  OLIGARCHICAL COLLECTIVISM
  by
  Emmanuel Goldstein


Winston began reading:


Chapter I
Ignorance is Strength

Throughout recorded time, and probably since the end of the Neolithic Age,
there have been three kinds of people in the world, the High, the Middle,
and the Low. They have been subdivided in many ways, they have borne
countless different names, and their relative numbers, as well as their
attitude towards one another, have varied from age to age: but the
essential structure of society has never altered. Even after enormous
upheavals and seemingly irrevocable changes, the same pattern has always
reasserted itself, just as a gyroscope will always return to equilibrium,
however far it is pushed one way or the other.

The aims of these groups are entirely irreconcilable...


Winston stopped reading, chiefly in order to appreciate the fact that he
was reading, in comfort and safety. He was alone: no telescreen, no ear at
the keyhole, no nervous impulse to glance over his shoulder or cover the
page with his hand. The sweet summer air played against his cheek. From
somewhere far away there floated the faint shouts of children: in the room
itself there was no sound except the insect voice of the clock. He settled
deeper into the arm-chair and put his feet up on the fender. It was bliss,
it was eternity. Suddenly, as one sometimes does with a book of which one
knows that one will ultimately read and re-read every word, he opened it
at a different place and found himself at Chapter III. He went on reading:


Chapter III
War is Peace

The splitting up of the world into three great super-states was an event
which could be and indeed was foreseen before the middle of the twentieth
century. With the absorption of Europe by Russia and of the British Empire
by the United States, two of the three existing powers, Eurasia and
Oceania, were already effectively in being. The third, Eastasia, only
emerged as a distinct unit after another decade of confused fighting. The
frontiers between the three super-states are in some places arbitrary, and
in others they fluctuate according to the fortunes of war, but in general
they follow geographical lines. Eurasia comprises the whole of the northern
part of the European and Asiatic land-mass, from Portugal to the Bering
Strait. Oceania comprises the Americas, the Atlantic islands including the
British Isles, Australasia, and the southern portion of Africa. Eastasia,
smaller than the others and with a less definite western frontier,
comprises China and the countries to the south of it, the Japanese islands
and a large but fluctuating portion of Manchuria, Mongolia, and Tibet.

In one combination or another, these three super-states are permanently at
war, and have been so for the past twenty-five years. War, however, is no
longer the desperate, annihilating struggle that it was in the early
decades of the twentieth century. It is a warfare of limited aims between
combatants who are unable to destroy one another, have no material cause
for fighting and are not divided by any genuine ideological difference.
This is not to say that either the conduct of war, or the prevailing
attitude towards it, has become less bloodthirsty or more chivalrous.
On the contrary, war hysteria is continuous and universal in all countries,
and such acts as raping, looting, the slaughter of children, the reduction
of whole populations to slavery, and reprisals against prisoners which
extend even to boiling and burying alive, are looked upon as normal,
and, when they are committed by one's own side and not by the enemy,
meritorious. But in a physical sense war involves very small numbers of
people, mostly highly-trained specialists, and causes comparatively few
casualties. The fighting, when there is any, takes place on the vague
frontiers whose whereabouts the average man can only guess at, or round
the Floating Fortresses which guard strategic spots on the sea lanes. In
the centres of civilization war means no more than a continuous shortage
of consumption goods, and the occasional crash of a rocket bomb which may
cause a few scores of deaths. War has in fact changed its character. More
exactly, the reasons for which war is waged have changed in their order of
importance. Motives which were already present to some small extent in the
great wars of the early twentieth century have now become dominant and
are consciously recognized and acted upon.

To understand the nature of the present war--for in spite of the regrouping
which occurs every few years, it is always the same war--one must realize
in the first place that it is impossible for it to be decisive. None of
the three super-states could be definitively conquered even by the other
two in combination. They are too evenly matched, and their natural defences
are too formidable. Eurasia is protected by its vast land spaces, Oceania
by the width of the Atlantic and the Pacific, Eastasia by the fecundity
and industriousness of its inhabitants. Secondly, there is no longer, in
a material sense, anything to fight about. With the establishment of
self-contained economies, in which production and consumption are geared
to one another, the scramble for markets which was a main cause of
previous wars has come to an end, while the competition for raw materials
is no longer a matter of life and death. In any case each of the three
super-states is so vast that it can obtain almost all the materials that
it needs within its own boundaries. In so far as the war has a direct
economic purpose, it is a war for labour power. Between the frontiers of
the super-states, and not permanently in the possession of any of them,
there lies a rough quadrilateral with its corners at Tangier, Brazzaville,
Darwin, and Hong Kong, containing within it about a fifth of the population
of the earth. It is for the possession of these thickly-populated regions,
and of the northern ice-cap, that the three powers are constantly
struggling. In practice no one power ever controls the whole of the
disputed area. Portions of it are constantly changing hands, and it is the
chance of seizing this or that fragment by a sudden stroke of treachery
that dictates the endless changes of alignment.

All of the disputed territories contain valuable minerals, and some of
them yield important vegetable products such as rubber which in colder
climates it is necessary to synthesize by comparatively expensive methods.
But above all they contain a bottomless reserve of cheap labour. Whichever
power controls equatorial Africa, or the countries of the Middle East, or
Southern India, or the Indonesian Archipelago, disposes also of the bodies
of scores or hundreds of millions of ill-paid and hard-working coolies.
The inhabitants of these areas, reduced more or less openly to the status
of slaves, pass continually from conqueror to conqueror, and are expended
like so much coal or oil in the race to turn out more armaments, to capture
more territory, to control more labour power, to turn out more armaments,
to capture more territory, and so on indefinitely. It should be noted that
the fighting never really moves beyond the edges of the disputed areas.
The frontiers of Eurasia flow back and forth between the basin of the Congo
and the northern shore of the Mediterranean; the islands of the Indian
Ocean and the Pacific are constantly being captured and recaptured by
Oceania or by Eastasia; in Mongolia the dividing line between Eurasia and
Eastasia is never stable; round the Pole all three powers lay claim to
enormous territories which in fact are largely uninhabited and unexplored:
but the balance of power always remains roughly even, and the territory
which forms the heartland of each super-state always remains inviolate.
Moreover, the labour of the exploited peoples round the Equator is not
really necessary to the world's economy. They add nothing to the wealth of
the world, since whatever they produce is used for purposes of war, and
the object of waging a war is always to be in a better position in which
to wage another war. By their labour the slave populations allow the tempo
of continuous warfare to be speeded up. But if they did not exist, the
structure of world society, and the process by which it maintains itself,
would not be essentially different.

The primary aim of modern warfare (in accordance with the principles of
DOUBLETHINK, this aim is simultaneously recognized and not recognized by
the directing brains of the Inner Party) is to use up the products of the
machine without raising the general standard of living. Ever since the end
of the nineteenth century, the problem of what to do with the surplus of
consumption goods has been latent in industrial society. At present, when
few human beings even have enough to eat, this problem is obviously not
urgent, and it might not have become so, even if no artificial processes
of destruction had been at work. The world of today is a bare, hungry,
dilapidated place compared with the world that existed before 1914, and
still more so if compared with the imaginary future to which the people of
that period looked forward. In the early twentieth century, the vision of
a future society unbelievably rich, leisured, orderly, and efficient--a
glittering antiseptic world of glass and steel and snow-white concrete--was
part of the consciousness of nearly every literate person. Science and
technology were developing at a prodigious speed, and it seemed natural to
assume that they would go on developing. This failed to happen, partly
because of the impoverishment caused by a long series of wars and
revolutions, partly because scientific and technical progress depended on
the empirical habit of thought, which could not survive in a strictly
regimented society. As a whole the world is more primitive today than it
was fifty years ago. Certain backward areas have advanced, and various
devices, always in some way connected with warfare and police espionage,
have been developed, but experiment and invention have largely stopped,
and the ravages of the atomic war of the nineteen-fifties have never been
fully repaired. Nevertheless the dangers inherent in the machine are still
there. From the moment when the machine first made its appearance it
was clear to all thinking people that the need for human drudgery, and
therefore to a great extent for human inequality, had disappeared. If the
machine were used deliberately for that end, hunger, overwork, dirt,
illiteracy, and disease could be eliminated within a few generations.
And in fact, without being used for any such purpose, but by a sort of
automatic process--by producing wealth which it was sometimes impossible
not to distribute--the machine did raise the living standards of the
average human being very greatly over a period of about fifty years at
the end of the nineteenth and the beginning of the twentieth centuries.

But it was also clear that an all-round increase in wealth threatened the
destruction--indeed, in some sense was the destruction--of a hierarchical
society. In a world in which everyone worked short hours, had enough to
eat, lived in a house with a bathroom and a refrigerator, and possessed
a motor-car or even an aeroplane, the most obvious and perhaps the most
important form of inequality would already have disappeared. If it once
became general, wealth would confer no distinction. It was possible, no
doubt, to imagine a society in which WEALTH, in the sense of personal
possessions and luxuries, should be evenly distributed, while POWER
remained in the hands of a small privileged caste. But in practice such
a society could not long remain stable. For if leisure and security were
enjoyed by all alike, the great mass of human beings who are normally
stupefied by poverty would become literate and would learn to think for
themselves; and when once they had done this, they would sooner or later
realize that the privileged minority had no function, and they would sweep
it away. In the long run, a hierarchical society was only possible on a
basis of poverty and ignorance. To return to the agricultural past, as
some thinkers about the beginning of the twentieth century dreamed of
doing, was not a practicable solution. It conflicted with the tendency
towards mechanization which had become quasi-instinctive throughout almost
the whole world, and moreover, any country which remained industrially
backward was helpless in a military sense and was bound to be dominated,
directly or indirectly, by its more advanced rivals.

Nor was it a satisfactory solution to keep the masses in poverty by
restricting the output of goods. This happened to a great extent during
the final phase of capitalism, roughly between 1920 and 1940. The economy
of many countries was allowed to stagnate, land went out of cultivation,
capital equipment was not added to, great blocks of the population were
prevented from working and kept half alive by State charity. But this,
too, entailed military weakness, and since the privations it inflicted
were obviously unnecessary, it made opposition inevitable. The problem was
how to keep the wheels of industry turning without increasing the real
wealth of the world. Goods must be produced, but they must not be
distributed. And in practice the only way of achieving this was by
continuous warfare.

The essential act of war is destruction, not necessarily of human lives,
but of the products of human labour. War is a way of shattering to pieces,
or pouring into the stratosphere, or sinking in the depths of the sea,
materials which might otherwise be used to make the masses too comfortable,
and hence, in the long run, too intelligent. Even when weapons of war are
not actually destroyed, their manufacture is still a convenient way of
expending labour power without producing anything that can be consumed.
A Floating Fortress, for example, has locked up in it the labour that
would build several hundred cargo-ships. Ultimately it is scrapped as
obsolete, never having brought any material benefit to anybody, and with
further enormous labours another Floating Fortress is built. In principle
the war effort is always so planned as to eat up any surplus that might
exist after meeting the bare needs of the population. In practice the needs
of the population are always underestimated, with the result that there is
a chronic shortage of half the necessities of life; but this is looked on
as an advantage. It is deliberate policy to keep even the favoured groups
somewhere near the brink of hardship, because a general state of scarcity
increases the importance of small privileges and thus magnifies the
distinction between one group and another. By the standards of the early
twentieth century, even a member of the Inner Party lives an austere,
laborious kind of life. Nevertheless, the few luxuries that he does enjoy
his large, well-appointed flat, the better texture of his clothes, the
better quality of his food and drink and tobacco, his two or three
servants, his private motor-car or helicopter--set him in a different world
from a member of the Outer Party, and the members of the Outer Party have
a similar advantage in comparison with the submerged masses whom we call
'the proles'. The social atmosphere is that of a besieged city, where the
possession of a lump of horseflesh makes the difference between wealth and
poverty. And at the same time the consciousness of being at war, and
therefore in danger, makes the handing-over of all power to a small caste
seem the natural, unavoidable condition of survival.

War, it will be seen, accomplishes the necessary destruction, but
accomplishes it in a psychologically acceptable way. In principle it would
be quite simple to waste the surplus labour of the world by building
temples and pyramids, by digging holes and filling them up again, or even
by producing vast quantities of goods and then setting fire to them. But
this would provide only the economic and not the emotional basis for a
hierarchical society. What is concerned here is not the morale of masses,
whose attitude is unimportant so long as they are kept steadily at work,
but the morale of the Party itself. Even the humblest Party member is
expected to be competent, industrious, and even intelligent within narrow
limits, but it is also necessary that he should be a credulous and ignorant
fanatic whose prevailing moods are fear, hatred, adulation, and orgiastic
triumph. In other words it is necessary that he should have the mentality
appropriate to a state of war. It does not matter whether the war is
actually happening, and, since no decisive victory is possible, it does
not matter whether the war is going well or badly. All that is needed is
that a state of war should exist. The splitting of the intelligence which
the Party requires of its members, and which is more easily achieved in an
atmosphere of war, is now almost universal, but the higher up the ranks
one goes, the more marked it becomes. It is precisely in the Inner Party
that war hysteria and hatred of the enemy are strongest. In his capacity
as an administrator, it is often necessary for a member of the Inner Party
to know that this or that item of war news is untruthful, and he may often
be aware that the entire war is spurious and is either not happening or
is being waged for purposes quite other than the declared ones: but such
knowledge is easily neutralized by the technique of DOUBLETHINK. Meanwhile
no Inner Party member wavers for an instant in his mystical belief that
the war is real, and that it is bound to end victoriously, with Oceania
the undisputed master of the entire world.

All members of the Inner Party believe in this coming conquest as an
article of faith. It is to be achieved either by gradually acquiring more
and more territory and so building up an overwhelming preponderance of
power, or by the discovery of some new and unanswerable weapon. The search
for new weapons continues unceasingly, and is one of the very few remaining
activities in which the inventive or speculative type of mind can find any
outlet. In Oceania at the present day, Science, in the old sense, has
almost ceased to exist. In Newspeak there is no word for 'Science'. The
empirical method of thought, on which all the scientific achievements of
the past were founded, is opposed to the most fundamental principles of
Ingsoc. And even technological progress only happens when its products can
in some way be used for the diminution of human liberty. In all the useful
arts the world is either standing still or going backwards. The fields are
cultivated with horse-ploughs while books are written by machinery. But
in matters of vital importance--meaning, in effect, war and police
espionage--the empirical approach is still encouraged, or at least
tolerated. The two aims of the Party are to conquer the whole surface of
the earth and to extinguish once and for all the possibility of independent
thought. There are therefore two great problems which the Party is
concerned to solve. One is how to discover, against his will, what another
human being is thinking, and the other is how to kill several hundred
million people in a few seconds without giving warning beforehand. In
so far as scientific research still continues, this is its subject matter.
The scientist of today is either a mixture of psychologist and inquisitor,
studying with real ordinary minuteness the meaning of facial expressions,
gestures, and tones of voice, and testing the truth-producing effects of
drugs, shock therapy, hypnosis, and physical torture; or he is chemist,
physicist, or biologist concerned only with such branches of his special
subject as are relevant to the taking of life. In the vast laboratories
of the Ministry of Peace, and in the experimental stations hidden in the
Brazilian forests, or in the Australian desert, or on lost islands of
the Antarctic, the teams of experts are indefatigably at work. Some are
concerned simply with planning the logistics of future wars; others devise
larger and larger rocket bombs, more and more powerful explosives, and more
and more impenetrable armour-plating; others search for new and deadlier
gases, or for soluble poisons capable of being produced in such quantities
as to destroy the vegetation of whole continents, or for breeds of disease
germs immunized against all possible antibodies; others strive to produce
a vehicle that shall bore its way under the soil like a submarine under
the water, or an aeroplane as independent of its base as a sailing-ship;
others explore even remoter possibilities such as focusing the sun's rays
through lenses suspended thousands of kilometres away in space, or
producing artificial earthquakes and tidal waves by tapping the heat at
the earth's centre.

But none of these projects ever comes anywhere near realization, and none
of the three super-states ever gains a significant lead on the others.
What is more remarkable is that all three powers already possess, in the
atomic bomb, a weapon far more powerful than any that their present
researches are likely to discover. Although the Party, according to its
habit, claims the invention for itself, atomic bombs first appeared as
early as the nineteen-forties, and were first used on a large scale about
ten years later. At that time some hundreds of bombs were dropped on
industrial centres, chiefly in European Russia, Western Europe, and
North America. The effect was to convince the ruling groups of all
countries that a few more atomic bombs would mean the end of organized
society, and hence of their own power. Thereafter, although no formal
agreement was ever made or hinted at, no more bombs were dropped. All three
powers merely continue to produce atomic bombs and store them up against
the decisive opportunity which they all believe will come sooner or later.
And meanwhile the art of war has remained almost stationary for thirty or
forty years. Helicopters are more used than they were formerly, bombing
planes have been largely superseded by self-propelled projectiles, and the
fragile movable battleship has given way to the almost unsinkable Floating
Fortress; but otherwise there has been little development. The tank, the
submarine, the torpedo, the machine gun, even the rifle and the hand
grenade are still in use. And in spite of the endless slaughters reported
in the Press and on the telescreens, the desperate battles of earlier wars,
in which hundreds of thousands or even millions of men were often killed
in a few weeks, have never been repeated.

None of the three super-states ever attempts any manoeuvre which involves
the risk of serious defeat. When any large operation is undertaken, it is
usually a surprise attack against an ally. The strategy that all three
powers are following, or pretend to themselves that they are following,
is the same. The plan is, by a combination of fighting, bargaining, and
well-timed strokes of treachery, to acquire a ring of bases completely
encircling one or other of the rival states, and then to sign a pact of
friendship with that rival and remain on peaceful terms for so many years
as to lull suspicion to sleep. During this time rockets loaded with atomic
bombs can be assembled at all the strategic spots; finally they will all
be fired simultaneously, with effects so devastating as to make retaliation
impossible. It will then be time to sign a pact of friendship with the
remaining world-power, in preparation for another attack. This scheme, it
is hardly necessary to say, is a mere daydream, impossible of realization.
Moreover, no fighting ever occurs except in the disputed areas round the
Equator and the Pole: no invasion of enemy territory is ever undertaken.
This explains the fact that in some places the frontiers between the
super-states are arbitrary. Eurasia, for example, could easily conquer the
British Isles, which are geographically part of Europe, or on the other
hand it would be possible for Oceania to push its frontiers to the Rhine
or even to the Vistula. But this would violate the principle, followed on
all sides though never formulated, of cultural integrity. If Oceania were
to conquer the areas that used once to be known as France and Germany, it
would be necessary either to exterminate the inhabitants, a task of great
physical difficulty, or to assimilate a population of about a hundred
million people, who, so far as technical development goes, are roughly on
the Oceanic level. The problem is the same for all three super-states.
It is absolutely necessary to their structure that there should be no
contact with foreigners, except, to a limited extent, with war prisoners
and coloured slaves. Even the official ally of the moment is always
regarded with the darkest suspicion. War prisoners apart, the average
citizen of Oceania never sets eyes on a citizen of either Eurasia or
Eastasia, and he is forbidden the knowledge of foreign languages. If he
were allowed contact with foreigners he would discover that they are
creatures similar to himself and that most of what he has been told about
them is lies. The sealed world in which he lives would be broken, and the
fear, hatred, and self-righteousness on which his morale depends might
evaporate. It is therefore realized on all sides that however often Persia,
or Egypt, or Java, or Ceylon may change hands, the main frontiers must
never be crossed by anything except bombs.

Under this lies a fact never mentioned aloud, but tacitly understood and
acted upon: namely, that the conditions of life in all three super-states
are very much the same. In Oceania the prevailing philosophy is called
Ingsoc, in Eurasia it is called Neo-Bolshevism, and in Eastasia it is
called by a Chinese name usually translated as Death-Worship, but perhaps
better rendered as Obliteration of the Self. The citizen of Oceania is not
allowed to know anything of the tenets of the other two philosophies, but
he is taught to execrate them as barbarous outrages upon morality and
common sense. Actually the three philosophies are barely distinguishable,
and the social systems which they support are not distinguishable at all.
Everywhere there is the same pyramidal structure, the same worship of
semi-divine leader, the same economy existing by and for continuous
warfare. It follows that the three super-states not only cannot conquer
one another, but would gain no advantage by doing so. On the contrary,
so long as they remain in conflict they prop one another up, like three
sheaves of corn. And, as usual, the ruling groups of all three powers are
simultaneously aware and unaware of what they are doing. Their lives are
dedicated to world conquest, but they also know that it is necessary that
the war should continue everlastingly and without victory. Meanwhile the
fact that there IS no danger of conquest makes possible the denial of
reality which is the special feature of Ingsoc and its rival systems of
thought. Here it is necessary to repeat what has been said earlier, that
by becoming continuous war has fundamentally changed its character.

In past ages, a war, almost by definition, was something that sooner or
later came to an end, usually in unmistakable victory or defeat. In the
past, also, war was one of the main instruments by which human societies
were kept in touch with physical reality. All rulers in all ages have tried
to impose a false view of the world upon their followers, but they could
not afford to encourage any illusion that tended to impair military
efficiency. So long as defeat meant the loss of independence, or some other
result generally held to be undesirable, the precautions against defeat
had to be serious. Physical facts could not be ignored. In philosophy, or
religion, or ethics, or politics, two and two might make five, but when
one was designing a gun or an aeroplane they had to make four. Inefficient
nations were always conquered sooner or later, and the struggle for
efficiency was inimical to illusions. Moreover, to be efficient it was
necessary to be able to learn from the past, which meant having a fairly
accurate idea of what had happened in the past. Newspapers and history
books were, of course, always coloured and biased, but falsification of
the kind that is practised today would have been impossible. War was a
sure safeguard of sanity, and so far as the ruling classes were concerned
it was probably the most important of all safeguards. While wars could be
won or lost, no ruling class could be completely irresponsible.

But when war becomes literally continuous, it also ceases to be dangerous.
When war is continuous there is no such thing as military necessity.
Technical progress can cease and the most palpable facts can be denied or
disregarded. As we have seen, researches that could be called scientific
are still carried out for the purposes of war, but they are essentially a
kind of daydreaming, and their failure to show results is not important.
Efficiency, even military efficiency, is no longer needed. Nothing is
efficient in Oceania except the Thought Police. Since each of the three
super-states is unconquerable, each is in effect a separate universe within
which almost any perversion of thought can be safely practised. Reality
only exerts its pressure through the needs of everyday life--the need to
eat and drink, to get shelter and clothing, to avoid swallowing poison or
stepping out of top-storey windows, and the like. Between life and death,
and between physical pleasure and physical pain, there is still a
distinction, but that is all. Cut off from contact with the outer world,
and with the past, the citizen of Oceania is like a man in interstellar
space, who has no way of knowing which direction is up and which is down.
The rulers of such a state are absolute, as the Pharaohs or the Caesars
could not be. They are obliged to prevent their followers from starving
to death in numbers large enough to be inconvenient, and they are obliged
to remain at the same low level of military technique as their rivals; but
once that minimum is achieved, they can twist reality into whatever shape
they choose.

The war, therefore, if we judge it by the standards of previous wars, is
merely an imposture. It is like the battles between certain ruminant
animals whose horns are set at such an angle that they are incapable of
hurting one another. But though it is unreal it is not meaningless. It
eats up the surplus of consumable goods, and it helps to preserve the
special mental atmosphere that a hierarchical society needs. War, it will
be seen, is now a purely internal affair. In the past, the ruling groups
of all countries, although they might recognize their common interest and
therefore limit the destructiveness of war, did fight against one another,
and the victor always plundered the vanquished. In our own day they are
not fighting against one another at all. The war is waged by each ruling
group against its own subjects, and the object of the war is not to make
or prevent conquests of territory, but to keep the structure of society
intact. The very word 'war', therefore, has become misleading. It would
probably be accurate to say that by becoming continuous war has ceased to
exist. The peculiar pressure that it exerted on human beings between the
Neolithic Age and the early twentieth century has disappeared and been
replaced by something quite different. The effect would be much the same
if the three super-states, instead of fighting one another, should agree
to live in perpetual peace, each inviolate within its own boundaries. For
in that case each would still be a self-contained universe, freed for ever
from the sobering influence of external danger. A peace that was truly
permanent would be the same as a permanent war. This--although the vast
majority of Party members understand it only in a shallower sense--is the
inner meaning of the Party slogan: WAR IS PEACE.


Winston stopped reading for a moment. Somewhere in remote distance a
rocket bomb thundered. The blissful feeling of being alone with the
forbidden book, in a room with no telescreen, had not worn off. Solitude
and safety were physical sensations, mixed up somehow with the tiredness
of his body, the softness of the chair, the touch of the faint breeze from
the window that played upon his cheek. The book fascinated him, or more
exactly it reassured him. In a sense it told him nothing that was new, but
that was part of the attraction. It said what he would have said, if it
had been possible for him to set his scattered thoughts in order. It was
the product of a mind similar to his own, but enormously more powerful,
more systematic, less fear-ridden. The best books, he perceived, are those
that tell you what you know already. He had just turned back to Chapter I
when he heard Julia's footstep on the stair and started out of his chair
to meet her. She dumped her brown tool-bag on the floor and flung herself
into his arms. It was more than a week since they had seen one another.

'I've got THE BOOK,' he said as they disentangled themselves.

'Oh, you've got it? Good,' she said without much interest, and almost
immediately knelt down beside the oil stove to make the coffee.

They did not return to the subject until they had been in bed for half an
hour. The evening was just cool enough to make it worth while to pull up
the counterpane. From below came the familiar sound of singing and the
scrape of boots on the flagstones. The brawny red-armed woman whom Winston
had seen there on his first visit was almost a fixture in the yard. There
seemed to be no hour of daylight when she was not marching to and fro
between the washtub and the line, alternately gagging herself with clothes
pegs and breaking forth into lusty song. Julia had settled down on her
side and seemed to be already on the point of falling asleep. He reached
out for the book, which was lying on the floor, and sat up against the
bedhead.

'We must read it,' he said. 'You too. All members of the Brotherhood have
to read it.'

'You read it,' she said with her eyes shut. 'Read it aloud. That's the
best way. Then you can explain it to me as you go.'

The clock's hands said six, meaning eighteen. They had three or four hours
ahead of them. He propped the book against his knees and began reading:


Chapter I
Ignorance is Strength

Throughout recorded time, and probably since the end of the Neolithic Age,
there have been three kinds of people in the world, the High, the Middle,
and the Low. They have been subdivided in many ways, they have borne
countless different names, and their relative numbers, as well as their
attitude towards one another, have varied from age to age: but the
essential structure of society has never altered. Even after enormous
upheavals and seemingly irrevocable changes, the same pattern has always
reasserted itself, just as a gyroscope will always return to equilibrium,
however far it is pushed one way or the other


'Julia, are you awake?' said Winston.

'Yes, my love, I'm listening. Go on. It's marvellous.'

He continued reading:


The aims of these three groups are entirely irreconcilable. The aim of
the High is to remain where they are. The aim of the Middle is to change
places with the High. The aim of the Low, when they have an aim--for it
is an abiding characteristic of the Low that they are too much crushed
by drudgery to be more than intermittently conscious of anything outside
their daily lives--is to abolish all distinctions and create a society in
which all men shall be equal. Thus throughout history a struggle which is
the same in its main outlines recurs over and over again. For long periods
the High seem to be securely in power, but sooner or later there always
comes a moment when they lose either their belief in themselves or their
capacity to govern efficiently, or both. They are then overthrown by the
Middle, who enlist the Low on their side by pretending to them that they
are fighting for liberty and justice. As soon as they have reached their
objective, the Middle thrust the Low back into their old position of
servitude, and themselves become the High. Presently a new Middle group
splits off from one of the other groups, or from both of them, and the
struggle begins over again. Of the three groups, only the Low are never
even temporarily successful in achieving their aims. It would be an
exaggeration to say that throughout history there has been no progress of
a material kind. Even today, in a period of decline, the average human
being is physically better off than he was a few centuries ago. But no
advance in wealth, no softening of manners, no reform or revolution has
ever brought human equality a millimetre nearer. From the point of view of
the Low, no historic change has ever meant much more than a change in the
name of their masters.

By the late nineteenth century the recurrence of this pattern had become
obvious to many observers. There then rose schools of thinkers who
interpreted history as a cyclical process and claimed to show that
inequality was the unalterable law of human life. This doctrine, of course,
had always had its adherents, but in the manner in which it was now put
forward there was a significant change. In the past the need for a
hierarchical form of society had been the doctrine specifically of the
High. It had been preached by kings and aristocrats and by the priests,
lawyers, and the like who were parasitical upon them, and it had generally
been softened by promises of compensation in an imaginary world beyond the
grave. The Middle, so long as it was struggling for power, had always made
use of such terms as freedom, justice, and fraternity. Now, however, the
concept of human brotherhood began to be assailed by people who were not
yet in positions of command, but merely hoped to be so before long. In the
past the Middle had made revolutions under the banner of equality, and
then had established a fresh tyranny as soon as the old one was overthrown.
The new Middle groups in effect proclaimed their tyranny beforehand.
Socialism, a theory which appeared in the early nineteenth century and was
the last link in a chain of thought stretching back to the slave rebellions
of antiquity, was still deeply infected by the Utopianism of past ages.
But in each variant of Socialism that appeared from about 1900 onwards the
aim of establishing liberty and equality was more and more openly
abandoned. The new movements which appeared in the middle years of the
century, Ingsoc in Oceania, Neo-Bolshevism in Eurasia, Death-Worship, as
it is commonly called, in Eastasia, had the conscious aim of perpetuating
UNfreedom and INequality. These new movements, of course, grew out of the
old ones and tended to keep their names and pay lip-service to their
ideology. But the purpose of all of them was to arrest progress and freeze
history at a chosen moment. The familiar pendulum swing was to happen once
more, and then stop. As usual, the High were to be turned out by the
Middle, who would then become the High; but this time, by conscious
strategy, the High would be able to maintain their position permanently.

The new doctrines arose partly because of the accumulation of historical
knowledge, and the growth of the historical sense, which had hardly existed
before the nineteenth century. The cyclical movement of history was now
intelligible, or appeared to be so; and if it was intelligible, then it
was alterable. But the principal, underlying cause was that, as early
as the beginning of the twentieth century, human equality had become
technically possible. It was still true that men were not equal in their
native talents and that functions had to be specialized in ways that
favoured some individuals against others; but there was no longer any real
need for class distinctions or for large differences of wealth. In earlier
ages, class distinctions had been not only inevitable but desirable.
Inequality was the price of civilization. With the development of machine
production, however, the case was altered. Even if it was still necessary
for human beings to do different kinds of work, it was no longer necessary
for them to live at different social or economic levels. Therefore, from
the point of view of the new groups who were on the point of seizing power,
human equality was no longer an ideal to be striven after, but a danger to
be averted. In more primitive ages, when a just and peaceful society was
in fact not possible, it had been fairly easy to believe it. The idea of
an earthly paradise in which men should live together in a state of
brotherhood, without laws and without brute labour, had haunted the human
imagination for thousands of years. And this vision had had a certain hold
even on the groups who actually profited by each historical change. The
heirs of the French, English, and American revolutions had partly believed
in their own phrases about the rights of man, freedom of speech, equality
before the law, and the like, and have even allowed their conduct to be
influenced by them to some extent. But by the fourth decade of the
twentieth century all the main currents of political thought were
authoritarian. The earthly paradise had been discredited at exactly the
moment when it became realizable. Every new political theory, by whatever
name it called itself, led back to hierarchy and regimentation. And in the
general hardening of outlook that set in round about 1930, practices which
had been long abandoned, in some cases for hundreds of years--imprisonment
without trial, the use of war prisoners as slaves, public executions,
torture to extract confessions, the use of hostages, and the deportation
of whole populations--not only became common again, but were tolerated
and even defended by people who considered themselves enlightened and
progressive.

It was only after a decade of national wars, civil wars, revolutions, and
counter-revolutions in all parts of the world that Ingsoc and its rivals
emerged as fully worked-out political theories. But they had been
foreshadowed by the various systems, generally called totalitarian, which
had appeared earlier in the century, and the main outlines of the world
which would emerge from the prevailing chaos had long been obvious. What
kind of people would control this world had been equally obvious. The new
aristocracy was made up for the most part of bureaucrats, scientists,
technicians, trade-union organizers, publicity experts, sociologists,
teachers, journalists, and professional politicians. These people, whose
origins lay in the salaried middle class and the upper grades of the
working class, had been shaped and brought together by the barren world of
monopoly industry and centralized government. As compared with their
opposite numbers in past ages, they were less avaricious, less tempted by
luxury, hungrier for pure power, and, above all, more conscious of what
they were doing and more intent on crushing opposition. This last
difference was cardinal. By comparison with that existing today, all the
tyrannies of the past were half-hearted and inefficient. The ruling groups
were always infected to some extent by liberal ideas, and were content to
leave loose ends everywhere, to regard only the overt act and to be
uninterested in what their subjects were thinking. Even the Catholic Church
of the Middle Ages was tolerant by modern standards. Part of the reason
for this was that in the past no government had the power to keep its
citizens under constant surveillance. The invention of print, however,
made it easier to manipulate public opinion, and the film and the radio
carried the process further. With the development of television, and
the technical advance which made it possible to receive and transmit
simultaneously on the same instrument, private life came to an end. Every
citizen, or at least every citizen important enough to be worth watching,
could be kept for twenty-four hours a day under the eyes of the police
and in the sound of official propaganda, with all other channels of
communication closed. The possibility of enforcing not only complete
obedience to the will of the State, but complete uniformity of opinion
on all subjects, now existed for the first time.

After the revolutionary period of the fifties and sixties, society
regrouped itself, as always, into High, Middle, and Low. But the new High
group, unlike all its forerunners, did not act upon instinct but knew what
was needed to safeguard its position. It had long been realized that the
only secure basis for oligarchy is collectivism. Wealth and privilege
are most easily defended when they are possessed jointly. The so-called
'abolition of private property' which took place in the middle years of
the century meant, in effect, the concentration of property in far fewer
hands than before: but with this difference, that the new owners were a
group instead of a mass of individuals. Individually, no member of the
Party owns anything, except petty personal belongings. Collectively, the
Party owns everything in Oceania, because it controls everything, and
disposes of the products as it thinks fit. In the years following the
Revolution it was able to step into this commanding position almost
unopposed, because the whole process was represented as an act of
collectivization. It had always been assumed that if the capitalist class
were expropriated, Socialism must follow: and unquestionably the
capitalists had been expropriated. Factories, mines, land, houses,
transport--everything had been taken away from them: and since these
things were no longer private property, it followed that they must be
public property. Ingsoc, which grew out of the earlier Socialist movement
and inherited its phraseology, has in fact carried out the main item in
the Socialist programme; with the result, foreseen and intended beforehand,
that economic inequality has been made permanent.

But the problems of perpetuating a hierarchical society go deeper than
this. There are only four ways in which a ruling group can fall from power.
Either it is conquered from without, or it governs so inefficiently that
the masses are stirred to revolt, or it allows a strong and discontented
Middle group to come into being, or it loses its own self-confidence and
willingness to govern. These causes do not operate singly, and as a rule
all four of them are present in some degree. A ruling class which could
guard against all of them would remain in power permanently. Ultimately
the determining factor is the mental attitude of the ruling class itself.

After the middle of the present century, the first danger had in reality
disappeared. Each of the three powers which now divide the world is in
fact unconquerable, and could only become conquerable through slow
demographic changes which a government with wide powers can easily avert.
The second danger, also, is only a theoretical one. The masses never
revolt of their own accord, and they never revolt merely because they are
oppressed. Indeed, so long as they are not permitted to have standards of
comparison, they never even become aware that they are oppressed. The
recurrent economic crises of past times were totally unnecessary and are
not now permitted to happen, but other and equally large dislocations
can and do happen without having political results, because there is no
way in which discontent can become articulate. As for the problem of
over-production, which has been latent in our society since the development
of machine technique, it is solved by the device of continuous warfare
(see Chapter III), which is also useful in keying up public morale to the
necessary pitch. From the point of view of our present rulers, therefore,
the only genuine dangers are the splitting-off of a new group of able,
under-employed, power-hungry people, and the growth of liberalism and
scepticism in their own ranks. The problem, that is to say, is educational.
It is a problem of continuously moulding the consciousness both of the
directing group and of the larger executive group that lies immediately
below it. The consciousness of the masses needs only to be influenced in
a negative way.

Given this background, one could infer, if one did not know it already,
the general structure of Oceanic society. At the apex of the pyramid comes
Big Brother. Big Brother is infallible and all-powerful. Every success,
every achievement, every victory, every scientific discovery, all
knowledge, all wisdom, all happiness, all virtue, are held to issue
directly from his leadership and inspiration. Nobody has ever seen Big
Brother. He is a face on the hoardings, a voice on the telescreen. We
may be reasonably sure that he will never die, and there is already
considerable uncertainty as to when he was born. Big Brother is the guise
in which the Party chooses to exhibit itself to the world. His function is
to act as a focusing point for love, fear, and reverence, emotions which
are more easily felt towards an individual than towards an organization.
Below Big Brother comes the Inner Party. Its numbers limited to six
millions, or something less than 2 per cent of the population of Oceania.
Below the Inner Party comes the Outer Party, which, if the Inner Party is
described as the brain of the State, may be justly likened to the hands.
Below that come the dumb masses whom we habitually refer to as 'the
proles', numbering perhaps 85 per cent of the population. In the terms
of our earlier classification, the proles are the Low: for the slave
population of the equatorial lands who pass constantly from conqueror
to conqueror, are not a permanent or necessary part of the structure.

In principle, membership of these three groups is not hereditary. The
child of Inner Party parents is in theory not born into the Inner Party.
Admission to either branch of the Party is by examination, taken at the
age of sixteen. Nor is there any racial discrimination, or any marked
domination of one province by another. Jews, Negroes, South Americans of
pure Indian blood are to be found in the highest ranks of the Party, and
the administrators of any area are always drawn from the inhabitants of
that area. In no part of Oceania do the inhabitants have the feeling that
they are a colonial population ruled from a distant capital. Oceania has
no capital, and its titular head is a person whose whereabouts nobody
knows. Except that English is its chief LINGUA FRANCA and Newspeak its
official language, it is not centralized in any way. Its rulers are not
held together by blood-ties but by adherence to a common doctrine. It is
true that our society is stratified, and very rigidly stratified, on what
at first sight appear to be hereditary lines. There is far less to-and-fro
movement between the different groups than happened under capitalism or
even in the pre-industrial age. Between the two branches of the Party
there is a certain amount of interchange, but only so much as will ensure
that weaklings are excluded from the Inner Party and that ambitious
members of the Outer Party are made harmless by allowing them to rise.
Proletarians, in practice, are not allowed to graduate into the Party. The
most gifted among them, who might possibly become nuclei of discontent,
are simply marked down by the Thought Police and eliminated. But this
state of affairs is not necessarily permanent, nor is it a matter of
principle. The Party is not a class in the old sense of the word. It does
not aim at transmitting power to its own children, as such; and if there
were no other way of keeping the ablest people at the top, it would be
perfectly prepared to recruit an entire new generation from the ranks of
the proletariat. In the crucial years, the fact that the Party was not a
hereditary body did a great deal to neutralize opposition. The older kind
of Socialist, who had been trained to fight against something called
'class privilege' assumed that what is not hereditary cannot be permanent.
He did not see that the continuity of an oligarchy need not be physical,
nor did he pause to reflect that hereditary aristocracies have always been
shortlived, whereas adoptive organizations such as the Catholic Church
have sometimes lasted for hundreds or thousands of years. The essence of
oligarchical rule is not father-to-son inheritance, but the persistence of
a certain world-view and a certain way of life, imposed by the dead upon
the living. A ruling group is a ruling group so long as it can nominate
its successors. The Party is not concerned with perpetuating its blood but
with perpetuating itself. WHO wields power is not important, provided that
the hierarchical structure remains always the same.

All the beliefs, habits, tastes, emotions, mental attitudes that
characterize our time are really designed to sustain the mystique of
the Party and prevent the true nature of present-day society from being
perceived. Physical rebellion, or any preliminary move towards rebellion,
is at present not possible. From the proletarians nothing is to be feared.
Left to themselves, they will continue from generation to generation and
from century to century, working, breeding, and dying, not only without
any impulse to rebel, but without the power of grasping that the world
could be other than it is. They could only become dangerous if the advance
of industrial technique made it necessary to educate them more highly;
but, since military and commercial rivalry are no longer important, the
level of popular education is actually declining. What opinions the masses
hold, or do not hold, is looked on as a matter of indifference. They can
be granted intellectual liberty because they have no intellect. In a Party
member, on the other hand, not even the smallest deviation of opinion on
the most unimportant subject can be tolerated.

A Party member lives from birth to death under the eye of the Thought
Police. Even when he is alone he can never be sure that he is alone.
Wherever he may be, asleep or awake, working or resting, in his bath or in
bed, he can be inspected without warning and without knowing that he is
being inspected. Nothing that he does is indifferent. His friendships, his
relaxations, his behaviour towards his wife and children, the expression
of his face when he is alone, the words he mutters in sleep, even the
characteristic movements of his body, are all jealously scrutinized. Not
only any actual misdemeanour, but any eccentricity, however small, any
change of habits, any nervous mannerism that could possibly be the symptom
of an inner struggle, is certain to be detected. He has no freedom of
choice in any direction whatever. On the other hand his actions are not
regulated by law or by any clearly formulated code of behaviour. In Oceania
there is no law. Thoughts and actions which, when detected, mean certain
death are not formally forbidden, and the endless purges, arrests,
tortures, imprisonments, and vaporizations are not inflicted as punishment
for crimes which have actually been committed, but are merely the
wiping-out of persons who might perhaps commit a crime at some time in the
future. A Party member is required to have not only the right opinions,
but the right instincts. Many of the beliefs and attitudes demanded of him
are never plainly stated, and could not be stated without laying bare the
contradictions inherent in Ingsoc. If he is a person naturally orthodox
(in Newspeak a GOODTHINKER), he will in all circumstances know, without
taking thought, what is the true belief or the desirable emotion. But in
any case an elaborate mental training, undergone in childhood and grouping
itself round the Newspeak words CRIMESTOP, BLACKWHITE, and DOUBLETHINK,
makes him unwilling and unable to think too deeply on any subject whatever.

A Party member is expected to have no private emotions and no respites
from enthusiasm. He is supposed to live in a continuous frenzy of hatred
of foreign enemies and internal traitors, triumph over victories, and
self-abasement before the power and wisdom of the Party. The discontents
produced by his bare, unsatisfying life are deliberately turned outwards
and dissipated by such devices as the Two Minutes Hate, and the
speculations which might possibly induce a sceptical or rebellious attitude
are killed in advance by his early acquired inner discipline. The first
and simplest stage in the discipline, which can be taught even to young
children, is called, in Newspeak, CRIMESTOP. CRIMESTOP means the faculty
of stopping short, as though by instinct, at the threshold of any dangerous
thought. It includes the power of not grasping analogies, of failing to
perceive logical errors, of misunderstanding the simplest arguments if
they are inimical to Ingsoc, and of being bored or repelled by any train
of thought which is capable of leading in a heretical direction. CRIMESTOP,
in short, means protective stupidity. But stupidity is not enough. On the
contrary, orthodoxy in the full sense demands a control over one's own
mental processes as complete as that of a contortionist over his body.
Oceanic society rests ultimately on the belief that Big Brother is
omnipotent and that the Party is infallible. But since in reality Big
Brother is not omnipotent and the party is not infallible, there is need
for an unwearying, moment-to-moment flexibility in the treatment of facts.
The keyword here is BLACKWHITE. Like so many Newspeak words, this word has
two mutually contradictory meanings. Applied to an opponent, it means the
habit of impudently claiming that black is white, in contradiction of the
plain facts. Applied to a Party member, it means a loyal willingness to
say that black is white when Party discipline demands this. But it means
also the ability to BELIEVE that black is white, and more, to KNOW that
black is white, and to forget that one has ever believed the contrary.
This demands a continuous alteration of the past, made possible by the
system of thought which really embraces all the rest, and which is known
in Newspeak as DOUBLETHINK.

The alteration of the past is necessary for two reasons, one of which is
subsidiary and, so to speak, precautionary. The subsidiary reason is that
the Party member, like the proletarian, tolerates present-day conditions
partly because he has no standards of comparison. He must be cut off from
the past, just as he must be cut off from foreign countries, because it is
necessary for him to believe that he is better off than his ancestors and
that the average level of material comfort is constantly rising. But by
far the more important reason for the readjustment of the past is the
need to safeguard the infallibility of the Party. It is not merely that
speeches, statistics, and records of every kind must be constantly brought
up to date in order to show that the predictions of the Party were in
all cases right. It is also that no change in doctrine or in political
alignment can ever be admitted. For to change one's mind, or even one's
policy, is a confession of weakness. If, for example, Eurasia or Eastasia
(whichever it may be) is the enemy today, then that country must always
have been the enemy. And if the facts say otherwise then the facts must
be altered. Thus history is continuously rewritten. This day-to-day
falsification of the past, carried out by the Ministry of Truth, is as
necessary to the stability of the regime as the work of repression and
espionage carried out by the Ministry of Love.

The mutability of the past is the central tenet of Ingsoc. Past events,
it is argued, have no objective existence, but survive only in written
records and in human memories. The past is whatever the records and the
memories agree upon. And since the Party is in full control of all records
and in equally full control of the minds of its members, it follows that
the past is whatever the Party chooses to make it. It also follows that
though the past is alterable, it never has been altered in any specific
instance. For when it has been recreated in whatever shape is needed at
the moment, then this new version IS the past, and no different past can
ever have existed. This holds good even when, as often happens, the same
event has to be altered out of recognition several times in the course of
a year. At all times the Party is in possession of absolute truth, and
clearly the absolute can never have been different from what it is now.
It will be seen that the control of the past depends above all on the
training of memory. To make sure that all written records agree with
the orthodoxy of the moment is merely a mechanical act. But it is also
necessary to REMEMBER that events happened in the desired manner. And if
it is necessary to rearrange one's memories or to tamper with written
records, then it is necessary to FORGET that one has done so. The trick of
doing this can be learned like any other mental technique. It is learned
by the majority of Party members, and certainly by all who are intelligent
as well as orthodox. In Oldspeak it is called, quite frankly, 'reality
control'. In Newspeak it is called DOUBLETHINK, though DOUBLETHINK
comprises much else as well.

DOUBLETHINK means the power of holding two contradictory beliefs in one's
mind simultaneously, and accepting both of them. The Party intellectual
knows in which direction his memories must be altered; he therefore knows
that he is playing tricks with reality; but by the exercise of DOUBLETHINK
he also satisfies himself that reality is not violated. The process has to
be conscious, or it would not be carried out with sufficient precision,
but it also has to be unconscious, or it would bring with it a feeling of
falsity and hence of guilt. DOUBLETHINK lies at the very heart of Ingsoc,
since the essential act of the Party is to use conscious deception while
retaining the firmness of purpose that goes with complete honesty. To tell
deliberate lies while genuinely believing in them, to forget any fact that
has become inconvenient, and then, when it becomes necessary again, to
draw it back from oblivion for just so long as it is needed, to deny the
existence of objective reality and all the while to take account of the
reality which one denies--all this is indispensably necessary. Even in
using the word DOUBLETHINK it is necessary to exercise DOUBLETHINK. For
by using the word one admits that one is tampering with reality; by a
fresh act of DOUBLETHINK one erases this knowledge; and so on indefinitely,
with the lie always one leap ahead of the truth. Ultimately it is by means
of DOUBLETHINK that the Party has been able--and may, for all we know,
continue to be able for thousands of years--to arrest the course of
history.

All past oligarchies have fallen from power either because they ossified
or because they grew soft. Either they became stupid and arrogant, failed
to adjust themselves to changing circumstances, and were overthrown; or
they became liberal and cowardly, made concessions when they should have
used force, and once again were overthrown. They fell, that is to say,
either through consciousness or through unconsciousness. It is the
achievement of the Party to have produced a system of thought in which
both conditions can exist simultaneously. And upon no other intellectual
basis could the dominion of the Party be made permanent. If one is to rule,
and to continue ruling, one must be able to dislocate the sense of reality.
For the secret of rulership is to combine a belief in one's own
infallibility with the Power to learn from past mistakes.

It need hardly be said that the subtlest practitioners of DOUBLETHINK are
those who invented DOUBLETHINK and know that it is a vast system of mental
cheating. In our society, those who have the best knowledge of what is
happening are also those who are furthest from seeing the world as it is.
In general, the greater the understanding, the greater the delusion; the
more intelligent, the less sane. One clear illustration of this is the
fact that war hysteria increases in intensity as one rises in the social
scale. Those whose attitude towards the war is most nearly rational are
the subject peoples of the disputed territories. To these people the war
is simply a continuous calamity which sweeps to and fro over their bodies
like a tidal wave. Which side is winning is a matter of complete
indifference to them. They are aware that a change of overlordship means
simply that they will be doing the same work as before for new masters who
treat them in the same manner as the old ones. The slightly more favoured
workers whom we call 'the proles' are only intermittently conscious of the
war. When it is necessary they can be prodded into frenzies of fear and
hatred, but when left to themselves they are capable of forgetting for
long periods that the war is happening. It is in the ranks of the Party,
and above all of the Inner Party, that the true war enthusiasm is found.
World-conquest is believed in most firmly by those who know it to be
impossible. This peculiar linking-together of opposites--knowledge with
ignorance, cynicism with fanaticism--is one of the chief distinguishing
marks of Oceanic society. The official ideology abounds with contradictions
even when there is no practical reason for them. Thus, the Party rejects
and vilifies every principle for which the Socialist movement originally
stood, and it chooses to do this in the name of Socialism. It preaches
a contempt for the working class unexampled for centuries past, and it
dresses its members in a uniform which was at one time peculiar to manual
workers and was adopted for that reason. It systematically undermines the
solidarity of the family, and it calls its leader by a name which is a
direct appeal to the sentiment of family loyalty. Even the names of the
four Ministries by which we are governed exhibit a sort of impudence in
their deliberate reversal of the facts. The Ministry of Peace concerns
itself with war, the Ministry of Truth with lies, the Ministry of Love
with torture and the Ministry of Plenty with starvation. These
contradictions are not accidental, nor do they result from ordinary
hypocrisy; they are deliberate exercises in DOUBLETHINK. For it is only
by reconciling contradictions that power can be retained indefinitely.
In no other way could the ancient cycle be broken. If human equality is
to be for ever averted--if the High, as we have called them, are to keep
their places permanently--then the prevailing mental condition must be
controlled insanity.

But there is one question which until this moment we have almost ignored.
It is; WHY should human equality be averted? Supposing that the mechanics
of the process have been rightly described, what is the motive for this
huge, accurately planned effort to freeze history at a particular moment
of time?

Here we reach the central secret. As we have seen. the mystique of the
Party, and above all of the Inner Party, depends upon DOUBLETHINK But
deeper than this lies the original motive, the never-questioned instinct
that first led to the seizure of power and brought DOUBLETHINK, the
Thought Police, continuous warfare, and all the other necessary
paraphernalia into existence afterwards. This motive really consists...


Winston became aware of silence, as one becomes aware of a new sound. It
seemed to him that Julia had been very still for some time past. She was
lying on her side, naked from the waist upwards, with her cheek pillowed
on her hand and one dark lock tumbling across her eyes. Her breast rose
and fell slowly and regularly.

'Julia.'

No answer.

'Julia, are you awake?'

No answer. She was asleep. He shut the book, put it carefully on the floor,
lay down, and pulled the coverlet over both of them.

He had still, he reflected, not learned the ultimate secret. He understood
HOW; he did not understand WHY. Chapter I, like Chapter III, had not
actually told him anything that he did not know, it had merely systematized
the knowledge that he possessed already. But after reading it he knew
better than before that he was not mad. Being in a minority, even a
minority of one, did not make you mad. There was truth and there was
untruth, and if you clung to the truth even against the whole world, you
were not mad. A yellow beam from the sinking sun slanted in through the
window and fell across the pillow. He shut his eyes. The sun on his face
and the girl's smooth body touching his own gave him a strong, sleepy,
confident feeling. He was safe, everything was all right. He fell asleep
murmuring 'Sanity is not statistical,' with the feeling that this remark
contained in it a profound wisdom.

*****

When he woke it was with the sensation of having slept for a long time,
but a glance at the old-fashioned clock told him that it was only
twenty-thirty. He lay dozing for a while; then the usual deep-lunged
singing struck up from the yard below:


  'It was only an 'opeless fancy,
  It passed like an Ipril dye,
  But a look an' a word an' the dreams they stirred
  They 'ave stolen my 'eart awye!'


The drivelling song seemed to have kept its popularity. You still heard it
all over the place. It had outlived the Hate Song. Julia woke at the
sound, stretched herself luxuriously, and got out of bed.

'I'm hungry,' she said. 'Let's make some more coffee. Damn! The stove's
gone out and the water's cold.' She picked the stove up and shook it.
'There's no oil in it.'

'We can get some from old Charrington, I expect.'

'The funny thing is I made sure it was full. I'm going to put my clothes
on,' she added. 'It seems to have got colder.'

Winston also got up and dressed himself. The indefatigable voice sang on:


  'They sye that time 'eals all things,
  They sye you can always forget;
  But the smiles an' the tears acrorss the years
  They twist my 'eart-strings yet!'


As he fastened the belt of his overalls he strolled across to the window.
The sun must have gone down behind the houses; it was not shining into the
yard any longer. The flagstones were wet as though they had just been
washed, and he had the feeling that the sky had been washed too, so fresh
and pale was the blue between the chimney-pots. Tirelessly the woman
marched to and fro, corking and uncorking herself, singing and falling
silent, and pegging out more diapers, and more and yet more. He wondered
whether she took in washing for a living or was merely the slave of twenty
or thirty grandchildren. Julia had come across to his side; together they
gazed down with a sort of fascination at the sturdy figure below. As he
looked at the woman in her characteristic attitude, her thick arms reaching
up for the line, her powerful mare-like buttocks protruded, it struck him
for the first time that she was beautiful. It had never before occurred to
him that the body of a woman of fifty, blown up to monstrous dimensions by
childbearing, then hardened, roughened by work till it was coarse in the
grain like an over-ripe turnip, could be beautiful. But it was so, and
after all, he thought, why not? The solid, contourless body, like a block
of granite, and the rasping red skin, bore the same relation to the body
of a girl as the rose-hip to the rose. Why should the fruit be held
inferior to the flower?

'She's beautiful,' he murmured.

'She's a metre across the hips, easily,' said Julia.

'That is her style of beauty,' said Winston.

He held Julia's supple waist easily encircled by his arm. From the hip to
the knee her flank was against his. Out of their bodies no child would
ever come. That was the one thing they could never do. Only by word of
mouth, from mind to mind, could they pass on the secret. The woman down
there had no mind, she had only strong arms, a warm heart, and a fertile
belly. He wondered how many children she had given birth to. It might
easily be fifteen. She had had her momentary flowering, a year, perhaps,
of wild-rose beauty and then she had suddenly swollen like a fertilized
fruit and grown hard and red and coarse, and then her life had been
laundering, scrubbing, darning, cooking, sweeping, polishing, mending,
scrubbing, laundering, first for children, then for grandchildren, over
thirty unbroken years. At the end of it she was still singing. The mystical
reverence that he felt for her was somehow mixed up with the aspect of
the pale, cloudless sky, stretching away behind the chimney-pots into
interminable distance. It was curious to think that the sky was the same
for everybody, in Eurasia or Eastasia as well as here. And the people
under the sky were also very much the same--everywhere, all over the world,
hundreds of thousands of millions of people just like this, people ignorant
of one another's existence, held apart by walls of hatred and lies, and
yet almost exactly the same--people who had never learned to think but who
were storing up in their hearts and bellies and muscles the power that
would one day overturn the world. If there was hope, it lay in the proles!
Without having read to the end of THE BOOK, he knew that that must be
Goldstein's final message. The future belonged to the proles. And could he
be sure that when their time came the world they constructed would not be
just as alien to him, Winston Smith, as the world of the Party? Yes,
because at the least it would be a world of sanity. Where there is
equality there can be sanity. Sooner or later it would happen, strength
would change into consciousness. The proles were immortal, you could not
doubt it when you looked at that valiant figure in the yard. In the end
their awakening would come. And until that happened, though it might be a
thousand years, they would stay alive against all the odds, like birds,
passing on from body to body the vitality which the Party did not share
and could not kill.

'Do you remember,' he said, 'the thrush that sang to us, that first day,
at the edge of the wood?'

'He wasn't singing to us,' said Julia. 'He was singing to please himself.
Not even that. He was just singing.'

The birds sang, the proles sang. the Party did not sing. All round the
world, in London and New York, in Africa and Brazil, and in the mysterious,
forbidden lands beyond the frontiers, in the streets of Paris and Berlin,
in the villages of the endless Russian plain, in the bazaars of China and
Japan--everywhere stood the same solid unconquerable figure, made monstrous
by work and childbearing, toiling from birth to death and still singing.
Out of those mighty loins a race of conscious beings must one day come.
You were the dead, theirs was the future. But you could share in that
future if you kept alive the mind as they kept alive the body, and passed
on the secret doctrine that two plus two make four.

'We are the dead,' he said.

'We are the dead,' echoed Julia dutifully.

'You are the dead,' said an iron voice behind them.

They sprang apart. Winston's entrails seemed to have turned into ice. He
could see the white all round the irises of Julia's eyes. Her face had
turned a milky yellow. The smear of rouge that was still on each cheekbone
stood out sharply, almost as though unconnected with the skin beneath.

'You are the dead,' repeated the iron voice.

'It was behind the picture,' breathed Julia.

'It was behind the picture,' said the voice. 'Remain exactly where you
are. Make no movement until you are ordered.'

It was starting, it was starting at last! They could do nothing except
stand gazing into one another's eyes. To run for life, to get out of the
house before it was too late--no such thought occurred to them. Unthinkable
to disobey the iron voice from the wall. There was a snap as though a catch
had been turned back, and a crash of breaking glass. The picture had fallen
to the floor uncovering the telescreen behind it.

'Now they can see us,' said Julia.

'Now we can see you,' said the voice. 'Stand out in the middle of the
room. Stand back to back. Clasp your hands behind your heads. Do not touch
one another.'

They were not touching, but it seemed to him that he could feel Julia's
body shaking. Or perhaps it was merely the shaking of his own. He could
just stop his teeth from chattering, but his knees were beyond his control.
There was a sound of trampling boots below, inside the house and outside.
The yard seemed to be full of men. Something was being dragged across the
stones. The woman's singing had stopped abruptly. There was a long, rolling
clang, as though the washtub had been flung across the yard, and then a
confusion of angry shouts which ended in a yell of pain.

'The house is surrounded,' said Winston.

'The house is surrounded,' said the voice.

He heard Julia snap her teeth together. 'I suppose we may as well say
good-bye,' she said.

'You may as well say good-bye,' said the voice. And then another quite
different voice, a thin, cultivated voice which Winston had the impression
of having heard before, struck in; 'And by the way, while we are on the
subject, "Here comes a candle to light you to bed, here comes a chopper to
chop off your head"!'

Something crashed on to the bed behind Winston's back. The head of a ladder
had been thrust through the window and had burst in the frame. Someone was
climbing through the window. There was a stampede of boots up the stairs.
The room was full of solid men in black uniforms, with iron-shod boots on
their feet and truncheons in their hands.

Winston was not trembling any longer. Even his eyes he barely moved. One
thing alone mattered; to keep still, to keep still and not give them an
excuse to hit you! A man with a smooth prize-fighter's jowl in which the
mouth was only a slit paused opposite him balancing his truncheon
meditatively between thumb and forefinger. Winston met his eyes. The
feeling of nakedness, with one's hands behind one's head and one's face
and body all exposed, was almost unbearable. The man protruded the tip
of a white tongue, licked the place where his lips should have been, and
then passed on. There was another crash. Someone had picked up the glass
paperweight from the table and smashed it to pieces on the hearth-stone.

The fragment of coral, a tiny crinkle of pink like a sugar rosebud from
a cake, rolled across the mat. How small, thought Winston, how small it
always was! There was a gasp and a thump behind him, and he received a
violent kick on the ankle which nearly flung him off his balance. One of
the men had smashed his fist into Julia's solar plexus, doubling her up
like a pocket ruler. She was thrashing about on the floor, fighting for
breath. Winston dared not turn his head even by a millimetre, but sometimes
her livid, gasping face came within the angle of his vision. Even in his
terror it was as though he could feel the pain in his own body, the deadly
pain which nevertheless was less urgent than the struggle to get back her
breath. He knew what it was like; the terrible, agonizing pain which was
there all the while but could not be suffered yet, because before all else
it was necessary to be able to breathe. Then two of the men hoisted her
up by knees and shoulders, and carried her out of the room like a sack.
Winston had a glimpse of her face, upside down, yellow and contorted, with
the eyes shut, and still with a smear of rouge on either cheek; and that
was the last he saw of her.

He stood dead still. No one had hit him yet. Thoughts which came of their
own accord but seemed totally uninteresting began to flit through his
mind. He wondered whether they had got Mr Charrington. He wondered what
they had done to the woman in the yard. He noticed that he badly wanted
to urinate, and felt a faint surprise, because he had done so only two or
three hours ago. He noticed that the clock on the mantelpiece said nine,
meaning twenty-one. But the light seemed too strong. Would not the light
be fading at twenty-one hours on an August evening? He wondered whether
after all he and Julia had mistaken the time--had slept the clock round
and thought it was twenty-thirty when really it was nought eight-thirty
on the following morning. But he did not pursue the thought further.
It was not interesting.

There was another, lighter step in the passage. Mr Charrington came into
the room. The demeanour of the black-uniformed men suddenly became more
subdued. Something had also changed in Mr Charrington's appearance. His
eye fell on the fragments of the glass paperweight.

'Pick up those pieces,' he said sharply.

A man stooped to obey. The cockney accent had disappeared; Winston suddenly
realized whose voice it was that he had heard a few moments ago on the
telescreen. Mr Charrington was still wearing his old velvet jacket, but
his hair, which had been almost white, had turned black. Also he was not
wearing his spectacles. He gave Winston a single sharp glance, as though
verifying his identity, and then paid no more attention to him. He was
still recognizable, but he was not the same person any longer. His body
had straightened, and seemed to have grown bigger. His face had undergone
only tiny changes that had nevertheless worked a complete transformation.
The black eyebrows were less bushy, the wrinkles were gone, the whole
lines of the face seemed to have altered; even the nose seemed shorter. It
was the alert, cold face of a man of about five-and-thirty. It occurred to
Winston that for the first time in his life he was looking, with knowledge,
at a member of the Thought Police.





PART THREE




Chapter 1



He did not know where he was. Presumably he was in the Ministry of Love,
but there was no way of making certain. He was in a high-ceilinged
windowless cell with walls of glittering white porcelain. Concealed lamps
flooded it with cold light, and there was a low, steady humming sound
which he supposed had something to do with the air supply. A bench, or
shelf, just wide enough to sit on ran round the wall, broken only by the
door and, at the end opposite the door, a lavatory pan with no wooden
seat. There were four telescreens, one in each wall.

There was a dull aching in his belly. It had been there ever since they
had bundled him into the closed van and driven him away. But he was also
hungry, with a gnawing, unwholesome kind of hunger. It might be twenty-four
hours since he had eaten, it might be thirty-six. He still did not know,
probably never would know, whether it had been morning or evening when
they arrested him. Since he was arrested he had not been fed.

He sat as still as he could on the narrow bench, with his hands crossed
on his knee. He had already learned to sit still. If you made unexpected
movements they yelled at you from the telescreen. But the craving for food
was growing upon him. What he longed for above all was a piece of bread.
He had an idea that there were a few breadcrumbs in the pocket of his
overalls. It was even possible--he thought this because from time to time
something seemed to tickle his leg--that there might be a sizeable bit of
crust there. In the end the temptation to find out overcame his fear; he
slipped a hand into his pocket.

'Smith!' yelled a voice from the telescreen. '6079 Smith W.! Hands out of
pockets in the cells!'

He sat still again, his hands crossed on his knee. Before being brought
here he had been taken to another place which must have been an ordinary
prison or a temporary lock-up used by the patrols. He did not know how
long he had been there; some hours at any rate; with no clocks and no
daylight it was hard to gauge the time. It was a noisy, evil-smelling
place. They had put him into a cell similar to the one he was now in,
but filthily dirty and at all times crowded by ten or fifteen people. The
majority of them were common criminals, but there were a few political
prisoners among them. He had sat silent against the wall, jostled by dirty
bodies, too preoccupied by fear and the pain in his belly to take much
interest in his surroundings, but still noticing the astonishing difference
in demeanour between the Party prisoners and the others. The Party
prisoners were always silent and terrified, but the ordinary criminals
seemed to care nothing for anybody. They yelled insults at the guards,
fought back fiercely when their belongings were impounded, wrote obscene
words on the floor, ate smuggled food which they produced from mysterious
hiding-places in their clothes, and even shouted down the telescreen when
it tried to restore order. On the other hand some of them seemed to be on
good terms with the guards, called them by nicknames, and tried to wheedle
cigarettes through the spyhole in the door. The guards, too, treated the
common criminals with a certain forbearance, even when they had to handle
them roughly. There was much talk about the forced-labour camps to which
most of the prisoners expected to be sent. It was 'all right' in the
camps, he gathered, so long as you had good contacts and knew the ropes.
There was bribery, favouritism, and racketeering of every kind, there was
homosexuality and prostitution, there was even illicit alcohol distilled
from potatoes. The positions of trust were given only to the common
criminals, especially the gangsters and the murderers, who formed a sort
of aristocracy. All the dirty jobs were done by the politicals.

There was a constant come-and-go of prisoners of every description:
drug-peddlers, thieves, bandits, black-marketeers, drunks, prostitutes.
Some of the drunks were so violent that the other prisoners had to combine
to suppress them. An enormous wreck of a woman, aged about sixty, with
great tumbling breasts and thick coils of white hair which had come down
in her struggles, was carried in, kicking and shouting, by four guards,
who had hold of her one at each corner. They wrenched off the boots with
which she had been trying to kick them, and dumped her down across
Winston's lap, almost breaking his thigh-bones. The woman hoisted herself
upright and followed them out with a yell of 'F---- bastards!' Then,
noticing that she was sitting on something uneven, she slid off Winston's
knees on to the bench.

'Beg pardon, dearie,' she said. 'I wouldn't 'a sat on you, only the buggers
put me there. They dono 'ow to treat a lady, do they?' She paused, patted
her breast, and belched. 'Pardon,' she said, 'I ain't meself, quite.'

She leant forward and vomited copiously on the floor.

'Thass better,' she said, leaning back with closed eyes. 'Never keep it
down, thass what I say. Get it up while it's fresh on your stomach, like.'

She revived, turned to have another look at Winston and seemed immediately
to take a fancy to him. She put a vast arm round his shoulder and drew him
towards her, breathing beer and vomit into his face.

'Wass your name, dearie?' she said.

'Smith,' said Winston.

'Smith?' said the woman. 'Thass funny. My name's Smith too. Why,' she
added sentimentally, 'I might be your mother!'

She might, thought Winston, be his mother. She was about the right age and
physique, and it was probable that people changed somewhat after twenty
years in a forced-labour camp.

No one else had spoken to him. To a surprising extent the ordinary
criminals ignored the Party prisoners. 'The polITS,' they called them,
with a sort of uninterested contempt. The Party prisoners seemed terrified
of speaking to anybody, and above all of speaking to one another. Only
once, when two Party members, both women, were pressed close together on
the bench, he overheard amid the din of voices a few hurriedly-whispered
words; and in particular a reference to something called 'room one-oh-one',
which he did not understand.

It might be two or three hours ago that they had brought him here. The
dull pain in his belly never went away, but sometimes it grew better and
sometimes worse, and his thoughts expanded or contracted accordingly. When
it grew worse he thought only of the pain itself, and of his desire for
food. When it grew better, panic took hold of him. There were moments
when he foresaw the things that would happen to him with such actuality
that his heart galloped and his breath stopped. He felt the smash of
truncheons on his elbows and iron-shod boots on his shins; he saw himself
grovelling on the floor, screaming for mercy through broken teeth. He
hardly thought of Julia. He could not fix his mind on her. He loved her
and would not betray her; but that was only a fact, known as he knew the
rules of arithmetic. He felt no love for her, and he hardly even wondered
what was happening to her. He thought oftener of O'Brien, with a flickering
hope. O'Brien might know that he had been arrested. The Brotherhood, he
had said, never tried to save its members. But there was the razor blade;
they would send the razor blade if they could. There would be perhaps five
seconds before the guard could rush into the cell. The blade would bite
into him with a sort of burning coldness, and even the fingers that held
it would be cut to the bone. Everything came back to his sick body, which
shrank trembling from the smallest pain. He was not certain that he would
use the razor blade even if he got the chance. It was more natural to exist
from moment to moment, accepting another ten minutes' life even with the
certainty that there was torture at the end of it.

Sometimes he tried to calculate the number of porcelain bricks in the
walls of the cell. It should have been easy, but he always lost count at
some point or another. More often he wondered where he was, and what time
of day it was. At one moment he felt certain that it was broad daylight
outside, and at the next equally certain that it was pitch darkness. In
this place, he knew instinctively, the lights would never be turned out.
It was the place with no darkness: he saw now why O'Brien had seemed to
recognize the allusion. In the Ministry of Love there were no windows. His
cell might be at the heart of the building or against its outer wall; it
might be ten floors below ground, or thirty above it. He moved himself
mentally from place to place, and tried to determine by the feeling of his
body whether he was perched high in the air or buried deep underground.

There was a sound of marching boots outside. The steel door opened with
a clang. A young officer, a trim black-uniformed figure who seemed to
glitter all over with polished leather, and whose pale, straight-featured
face was like a wax mask, stepped smartly through the doorway. He motioned
to the guards outside to bring in the prisoner they were leading. The
poet Ampleforth shambled into the cell. The door clanged shut again.

Ampleforth made one or two uncertain movements from side to side, as
though having some idea that there was another door to go out of, and then
began to wander up and down the cell. He had not yet noticed Winston's
presence. His troubled eyes were gazing at the wall about a metre above
the level of Winston's head. He was shoeless; large, dirty toes were
sticking out of the holes in his socks. He was also several days away
from a shave. A scrubby beard covered his face to the cheekbones, giving
him an air of ruffianism that went oddly with his large weak frame and
nervous movements.

Winston roused himself a little from his lethargy. He must speak
to Ampleforth, and risk the yell from the telescreen. It was even
conceivable that Ampleforth was the bearer of the razor blade.

'Ampleforth,' he said.

There was no yell from the telescreen. Ampleforth paused, mildly startled.
His eyes focused themselves slowly on Winston.

'Ah, Smith!' he said. 'You too!'

'What are you in for?'

'To tell you the truth--' He sat down awkwardly on the bench opposite
Winston. 'There is only one offence, is there not?' he said.

'And have you committed it?'

'Apparently I have.'

He put a hand to his forehead and pressed his temples for a moment, as
though trying to remember something.

'These things happen,' he began vaguely. 'I have been able to recall one
instance--a possible instance. It was an indiscretion, undoubtedly. We
were producing a definitive edition of the poems of Kipling. I allowed the
word "God" to remain at the end of a line. I could not help it!' he added
almost indignantly, raising his face to look at Winston. 'It was impossible
to change the line. The rhyme was "rod". Do you realize that there are only
twelve rhymes to "rod" in the entire language? For days I had racked my
brains. There WAS no other rhyme.'

The expression on his face changed. The annoyance passed out of it and for
a moment he looked almost pleased. A sort of intellectual warmth, the joy
of the pedant who has found out some useless fact, shone through the dirt
and scrubby hair.

'Has it ever occurred to you,' he said, 'that the whole history of English
poetry has been determined by the fact that the English language lacks
rhymes?'

No, that particular thought had never occurred to Winston. Nor, in the
circumstances, did it strike him as very important or interesting.

'Do you know what time of day it is?' he said.

Ampleforth looked startled again. 'I had hardly thought about it. They
arrested me--it could be two days ago--perhaps three.' His eyes flitted
round the walls, as though he half expected to find a window somewhere.
'There is no difference between night and day in this place. I do not see
how one can calculate the time.'

They talked desultorily for some minutes, then, without apparent reason,
a yell from the telescreen bade them be silent. Winston sat quietly, his
hands crossed. Ampleforth, too large to sit in comfort on the narrow
bench, fidgeted from side to side, clasping his lank hands first round one
knee, then round the other. The telescreen barked at him to keep still.
Time passed. Twenty minutes, an hour--it was difficult to judge. Once more
there was a sound of boots outside. Winston's entrails contracted. Soon,
very soon, perhaps in five minutes, perhaps now, the tramp of boots would
mean that his own turn had come.

The door opened. The cold-faced young officer stepped into the cell. With
a brief movement of the hand he indicated Ampleforth.

'Room 101,' he said.

Ampleforth marched clumsily out between the guards, his face vaguely
perturbed, but uncomprehending.

What seemed like a long time passed. The pain in Winston's belly had
revived. His mind sagged round and round on the same trick, like a ball
falling again and again into the same series of slots. He had only six
thoughts. The pain in his belly; a piece of bread; the blood and the
screaming; O'Brien; Julia; the razor blade. There was another spasm in his
entrails, the heavy boots were approaching. As the door opened, the wave
of air that it created brought in a powerful smell of cold sweat. Parsons
walked into the cell. He was wearing khaki shorts and a sports-shirt.

This time Winston was startled into self-forgetfulness.

'YOU here!' he said.

Parsons gave Winston a glance in which there was neither interest nor
surprise, but only misery. He began walking jerkily up and down, evidently
unable to keep still. Each time he straightened his pudgy knees it was
apparent that they were trembling. His eyes had a wide-open, staring look,
as though he could not prevent himself from gazing at something in the
middle distance.

'What are you in for?' said Winston.

'Thoughtcrime!' said Parsons, almost blubbering. The tone of his voice
implied at once a complete admission of his guilt and a sort of incredulous
horror that such a word could be applied to himself. He paused opposite
Winston and began eagerly appealing to him: 'You don't think they'll shoot
me, do you, old chap? They don't shoot you if you haven't actually done
anything--only thoughts, which you can't help? I know they give you a fair
hearing. Oh, I trust them for that! They'll know my record, won't they?
YOU know what kind of chap I was. Not a bad chap in my way. Not brainy, of
course, but keen. I tried to do my best for the Party, didn't I? I'll get
off with five years, don't you think? Or even ten years? A chap like me
could make himself pretty useful in a labour-camp. They wouldn't shoot me
for going off the rails just once?'

'Are you guilty?' said Winston.

'Of course I'm guilty!' cried Parsons with a servile glance at the
telescreen. 'You don't think the Party would arrest an innocent man,
do you?' His frog-like face grew calmer, and even took on a slightly
sanctimonious expression. 'Thoughtcrime is a dreadful thing, old man,'
he said sententiously. 'It's insidious. It can get hold of you without
your even knowing it. Do you know how it got hold of me? In my sleep! Yes,
that's a fact. There I was, working away, trying to do my bit--never knew
I had any bad stuff in my mind at all. And then I started talking in my
sleep. Do you know what they heard me saying?'

He sank his voice, like someone who is obliged for medical reasons to
utter an obscenity.

'"Down with Big Brother!" Yes, I said that! Said it over and over again,
it seems. Between you and me, old man, I'm glad they got me before it went
any further. Do you know what I'm going to say to them when I go up before
the tribunal? "Thank you," I'm going to say, "thank you for saving me
before it was too late."'

'Who denounced you?' said Winston.

'It was my little daughter,' said Parsons with a sort of doleful pride.
'She listened at the keyhole. Heard what I was saying, and nipped off to
the patrols the very next day. Pretty smart for a nipper of seven, eh?
I don't bear her any grudge for it. In fact I'm proud of her. It shows I
brought her up in the right spirit, anyway.'

He made a few more jerky movements up and down, several times, casting a
longing glance at the lavatory pan. Then he suddenly ripped down his
shorts.

'Excuse me, old man,' he said. 'I can't help it. It's the waiting.'

He plumped his large posterior into the lavatory pan. Winston covered his
face with his hands.

'Smith!' yelled the voice from the telescreen. '6079 Smith W.! Uncover your
face. No faces covered in the cells.'

Winston uncovered his face. Parsons used the lavatory, loudly and
abundantly. It then turned out that the plug was defective and the cell
stank abominably for hours afterwards.

Parsons was removed. More prisoners came and went, mysteriously. One, a
woman, was consigned to 'Room 101', and, Winston noticed, seemed to shrivel
and turn a different colour when she heard the words. A time came when, if
it had been morning when he was brought here, it would be afternoon; or if
it had been afternoon, then it would be midnight. There were six prisoners
in the cell, men and women. All sat very still. Opposite Winston there sat
a man with a chinless, toothy face exactly like that of some large,
harmless rodent. His fat, mottled cheeks were so pouched at the bottom
that it was difficult not to believe that he had little stores of food
tucked away there. His pale-grey eyes flitted timorously from face to face
and turned quickly away again when he caught anyone's eye.

The door opened, and another prisoner was brought in whose appearance sent
a momentary chill through Winston. He was a commonplace, mean-looking man
who might have been an engineer or technician of some kind. But what was
startling was the emaciation of his face. It was like a skull. Because of
its thinness the mouth and eyes looked disproportionately large, and the
eyes seemed filled with a murderous, unappeasable hatred of somebody or
something.

The man sat down on the bench at a little distance from Winston. Winston
did not look at him again, but the tormented, skull-like face was as
vivid in his mind as though it had been straight in front of his eyes.
Suddenly he realized what was the matter. The man was dying of starvation.
The same thought seemed to occur almost simultaneously to everyone in the
cell. There was a very faint stirring all the way round the bench. The
eyes of the chinless man kept flitting towards the skull-faced man, then
turning guiltily away, then being dragged back by an irresistible
attraction. Presently he began to fidget on his seat. At last he stood up,
waddled clumsily across the cell, dug down into the pocket of his overalls,
and, with an abashed air, held out a grimy piece of bread to the
skull-faced man.

There was a furious, deafening roar from the telescreen. The chinless man
jumped in his tracks. The skull-faced man had quickly thrust his hands
behind his back, as though demonstrating to all the world that he refused
the gift.

'Bumstead!' roared the voice. '2713 Bumstead J.! Let fall that piece of
bread!'

The chinless man dropped the piece of bread on the floor.

'Remain standing where you are,' said the voice. 'Face the door. Make no
movement.'

The chinless man obeyed. His large pouchy cheeks were quivering
uncontrollably. The door clanged open. As the young officer entered and
stepped aside, there emerged from behind him a short stumpy guard with
enormous arms and shoulders. He took his stand opposite the chinless man,
and then, at a signal from the officer, let free a frightful blow, with
all the weight of his body behind it, full in the chinless man's mouth.
The force of it seemed almost to knock him clear of the floor. His body
was flung across the cell and fetched up against the base of the lavatory
seat. For a moment he lay as though stunned, with dark blood oozing from
his mouth and nose. A very faint whimpering or squeaking, which seemed
unconscious, came out of him. Then he rolled over and raised himself
unsteadily on hands and knees. Amid a stream of blood and saliva, the two
halves of a dental plate fell out of his mouth.

The prisoners sat very still, their hands crossed on their knees. The
chinless man climbed back into his place. Down one side of his face the
flesh was darkening. His mouth had swollen into a shapeless cherry-coloured
mass with a black hole in the middle of it.

From time to time a little blood dripped on to the breast of his overalls.
His grey eyes still flitted from face to face, more guiltily than ever,
as though he were trying to discover how much the others despised him for
his humiliation.

The door opened. With a small gesture the officer indicated the
skull-faced man.

'Room 101,' he said.

There was a gasp and a flurry at Winston's side. The man had actually
flung himself on his knees on the floor, with his hand clasped together.

'Comrade! Officer!' he cried. 'You don't have to take me to that place!
Haven't I told you everything already? What else is it you want to know?
There's nothing I wouldn't confess, nothing! Just tell me what it is and
I'll confess straight off. Write it down and I'll sign it--anything!
Not room 101!'

'Room 101,' said the officer.

The man's face, already very pale, turned a colour Winston would not have
believed possible. It was definitely, unmistakably, a shade of green.

'Do anything to me!' he yelled. 'You've been starving me for weeks. Finish
it off and let me die. Shoot me. Hang me. Sentence me to twenty-five
years. Is there somebody else you want me to give away? Just say who it is
and I'll tell you anything you want. I don't care who it is or what you do
to them. I've got a wife and three children. The biggest of them isn't six
years old. You can take the whole lot of them and cut their throats in
front of my eyes, and I'll stand by and watch it. But not Room 101!'

'Room 101,' said the officer.

The man looked frantically round at the other prisoners, as though with
some idea that he could put another victim in his own place. His eyes
settled on the smashed face of the chinless man. He flung out a lean arm.

'That's the one you ought to be taking, not me!' he shouted. 'You didn't
hear what he was saying after they bashed his face. Give me a chance and
I'll tell you every word of it. HE'S the one that's against the Party, not
me.' The guards stepped forward. The man's voice rose to a shriek. 'You
didn't hear him!' he repeated. 'Something went wrong with the telescreen.
HE'S the one you want. Take him, not me!'

The two sturdy guards had stooped to take him by the arms. But just at
this moment he flung himself across the floor of the cell and grabbed one
of the iron legs that supported the bench. He had set up a wordless
howling, like an animal. The guards took hold of him to wrench him loose,
but he clung on with astonishing strength. For perhaps twenty seconds
they were hauling at him. The prisoners sat quiet, their hands crossed on
their knees, looking straight in front of them. The howling stopped; the
man had no breath left for anything except hanging on. Then there was a
different kind of cry. A kick from a guard's boot had broken the fingers
of one of his hands. They dragged him to his feet.

'Room 101,' said the officer.

The man was led out, walking unsteadily, with head sunken, nursing his
crushed hand, all the fight had gone out of him.

A long time passed. If it had been midnight when the skull-faced man was
taken away, it was morning: if morning, it was afternoon. Winston was
alone, and had been alone for hours. The pain of sitting on the narrow
bench was such that often he got up and walked about, unreproved by the
telescreen. The piece of bread still lay where the chinless man had
dropped it. At the beginning it needed a hard effort not to look at it,
but presently hunger gave way to thirst. His mouth was sticky and
evil-tasting. The humming sound and the unvarying white light induced a
sort of faintness, an empty feeling inside his head. He would get up
because the ache in his bones was no longer bearable, and then would sit
down again almost at once because he was too dizzy to make sure of
staying on his feet. Whenever his physical sensations were a little under
control the terror returned. Sometimes with a fading hope he thought of
O'Brien and the razor blade. It was thinkable that the razor blade might
arrive concealed in his food, if he were ever fed. More dimly he thought
of Julia. Somewhere or other she was suffering perhaps far worse than he.
She might be screaming with pain at this moment. He thought: 'If I could
save Julia by doubling my own pain, would I do it? Yes, I would.' But that
was merely an intellectual decision, taken because he knew that he ought
to take it. He did not feel it. In this place you could not feel anything,
except pain and foreknowledge of pain. Besides, was it possible, when you
were actually suffering it, to wish for any reason that your own pain
should increase? But that question was not answerable yet.

The boots were approaching again. The door opened. O'Brien came in.

Winston started to his feet. The shock of the sight had driven all
caution out of him. For the first time in many years he forgot the
presence of the telescreen.

'They've got you too!' he cried.

'They got me a long time ago,' said O'Brien with a mild, almost regretful
irony. He stepped aside. From behind him there emerged a broad-chested
guard with a long black truncheon in his hand.

'You know this, Winston,' said O'Brien. 'Don't deceive yourself. You did
know it--you have always known it.'

Yes, he saw now, he had always known it. But there was no time to think of
that. All he had eyes for was the truncheon in the guard's hand. It might
fall anywhere; on the crown, on the tip of the ear, on the upper arm, on
the elbow----

The elbow! He had slumped to his knees, almost paralysed, clasping the
stricken elbow with his other hand. Everything had exploded into yellow
light. Inconceivable, inconceivable that one blow could cause such pain!
The light cleared and he could see the other two looking down at him. The
guard was laughing at his contortions. One question at any rate was
answered. Never, for any reason on earth, could you wish for an increase
of pain. Of pain you could wish only one thing: that it should stop.
Nothing in the world was so bad as physical pain. In the face of pain
there are no heroes, no heroes, he thought over and over as he writhed
on the floor, clutching uselessly at his disabled left arm.




Chapter 2



He was lying on something that felt like a camp bed, except that it was
higher off the ground and that he was fixed down in some way so that he
could not move. Light that seemed stronger than usual was falling on his
face. O'Brien was standing at his side, looking down at him intently. At
the other side of him stood a man in a white coat, holding a hypodermic
syringe.

Even after his eyes were open he took in his surroundings only gradually.
He had the impression of swimming up into this room from some quite
different world, a sort of underwater world far beneath it. How long he
had been down there he did not know. Since the moment when they arrested
him he had not seen darkness or daylight. Besides, his memories were not
continuous. There had been times when consciousness, even the sort of
consciousness that one has in sleep, had stopped dead and started again
after a blank interval. But whether the intervals were of days or weeks
or only seconds, there was no way of knowing.

With that first blow on the elbow the nightmare had started. Later he was
to realize that all that then happened was merely a preliminary, a routine
interrogation to which nearly all prisoners were subjected. There was a
long range of crimes--espionage, sabotage, and the like--to which everyone
had to confess as a matter of course. The confession was a formality,
though the torture was real. How many times he had been beaten, how long
the beatings had continued, he could not remember. Always there were five
or six men in black uniforms at him simultaneously. Sometimes it was
fists, sometimes it was truncheons, sometimes it was steel rods, sometimes
it was boots. There were times when he rolled about the floor, as shameless
as an animal, writhing his body this way and that in an endless, hopeless
effort to dodge the kicks, and simply inviting more and yet more kicks,
in his ribs, in his belly, on his elbows, on his shins, in his groin,
in his testicles, on the bone at the base of his spine. There were times
when it went on and on until the cruel, wicked, unforgivable thing seemed
to him not that the guards continued to beat him but that he could not
force himself into losing consciousness. There were times when his nerve
so forsook him that he began shouting for mercy even before the beating
began, when the mere sight of a fist drawn back for a blow was enough
to make him pour forth a confession of real and imaginary crimes. There
were other times when he started out with the resolve of confessing
nothing, when every word had to be forced out of him between gasps of
pain, and there were times when he feebly tried to compromise, when he
said to himself: 'I will confess, but not yet. I must hold out till the
pain becomes unbearable. Three more kicks, two more kicks, and then I will
tell them what they want.' Sometimes he was beaten till he could hardly
stand, then flung like a sack of potatoes on to the stone floor of a cell,
left to recuperate for a few hours, and then taken out and beaten again.
There were also longer periods of recovery. He remembered them dimly,
because they were spent chiefly in sleep or stupor. He remembered a cell
with a plank bed, a sort of shelf sticking out from the wall, and a tin
wash-basin, and meals of hot soup and bread and sometimes coffee. He
remembered a surly barber arriving to scrape his chin and crop his hair,
and businesslike, unsympathetic men in white coats feeling his pulse,
tapping his reflexes, turning up his eyelids, running harsh fingers over
him in search for broken bones, and shooting needles into his arm to make
him sleep.

The beatings grew less frequent, and became mainly a threat, a horror
to which he could be sent back at any moment when his answers were
unsatisfactory. His questioners now were not ruffians in black uniforms
but Party intellectuals, little rotund men with quick movements and
flashing spectacles, who worked on him in relays over periods which
lasted--he thought, he could not be sure--ten or twelve hours at a stretch.
These other questioners saw to it that he was in constant slight pain, but
it was not chiefly pain that they relied on. They slapped his face, wrung
his ears, pulled his hair, made him stand on one leg, refused him leave to
urinate, shone glaring lights in his face until his eyes ran with water;
but the aim of this was simply to humiliate him and destroy his power of
arguing and reasoning. Their real weapon was the merciless questioning
that went on and on, hour after hour, tripping him up, laying traps for
him, twisting everything that he said, convicting him at every step of
lies and self-contradiction until he began weeping as much from shame as
from nervous fatigue. Sometimes he would weep half a dozen times in a
single session. Most of the time they screamed abuse at him and threatened
at every hesitation to deliver him over to the guards again; but sometimes
they would suddenly change their tune, call him comrade, appeal to him in
the name of Ingsoc and Big Brother, and ask him sorrowfully whether even
now he had not enough loyalty to the Party left to make him wish to
undo the evil he had done. When his nerves were in rags after hours of
questioning, even this appeal could reduce him to snivelling tears. In the
end the nagging voices broke him down more completely than the boots and
fists of the guards. He became simply a mouth that uttered, a hand that
signed, whatever was demanded of him. His sole concern was to find out
what they wanted him to confess, and then confess it quickly, before the
bullying started anew. He confessed to the assassination of eminent Party
members, the distribution of seditious pamphlets, embezzlement of public
funds, sale of military secrets, sabotage of every kind. He confessed that
he had been a spy in the pay of the Eastasian government as far back as
1968. He confessed that he was a religious believer, an admirer of
capitalism, and a sexual pervert. He confessed that he had murdered his
wife, although he knew, and his questioners must have known, that his wife
was still alive. He confessed that for years he had been in personal touch
with Goldstein and had been a member of an underground organization which
had included almost every human being he had ever known. It was easier to
confess everything and implicate everybody. Besides, in a sense it was all
true. It was true that he had been the enemy of the Party, and in the eyes
of the Party there was no distinction between the thought and the deed.

There were also memories of another kind. They stood out in his mind
disconnectedly, like pictures with blackness all round them.

He was in a cell which might have been either dark or light, because he
could see nothing except a pair of eyes. Near at hand some kind of
instrument was ticking slowly and regularly. The eyes grew larger and more
luminous. Suddenly he floated out of his seat, dived into the eyes, and
was swallowed up.

He was strapped into a chair surrounded by dials, under dazzling lights.
A man in a white coat was reading the dials. There was a tramp of heavy
boots outside. The door clanged open. The waxed-faced officer marched in,
followed by two guards.

'Room 101,' said the officer.

The man in the white coat did not turn round. He did not look at Winston
either; he was looking only at the dials.

He was rolling down a mighty corridor, a kilometre wide, full of glorious,
golden light, roaring with laughter and shouting out confessions at the
top of his voice. He was confessing everything, even the things he had
succeeded in holding back under the torture. He was relating the entire
history of his life to an audience who knew it already. With him were the
guards, the other questioners, the men in white coats, O'Brien, Julia,
Mr Charrington, all rolling down the corridor together and shouting with
laughter. Some dreadful thing which had lain embedded in the future had
somehow been skipped over and had not happened. Everything was all right,
there was no more pain, the last detail of his life was laid bare,
understood, forgiven.

He was starting up from the plank bed in the half-certainty that he had
heard O'Brien's voice. All through his interrogation, although he had
never seen him, he had had the feeling that O'Brien was at his elbow, just
out of sight. It was O'Brien who was directing everything. It was he who
set the guards on to Winston and who prevented them from killing him. It
was he who decided when Winston should scream with pain, when he should
have a respite, when he should be fed, when he should sleep, when the
drugs should be pumped into his arm. It was he who asked the questions and
suggested the answers. He was the tormentor, he was the protector, he was
the inquisitor, he was the friend. And once--Winston could not remember
whether it was in drugged sleep, or in normal sleep, or even in a moment
of wakefulness--a voice murmured in his ear: 'Don't worry, Winston; you
are in my keeping. For seven years I have watched over you. Now the
turning-point has come. I shall save you, I shall make you perfect.' He
was not sure whether it was O'Brien's voice; but it was the same voice
that had said to him, 'We shall meet in the place where there is no
darkness,' in that other dream, seven years ago.

He did not remember any ending to his interrogation. There was a period of
blackness and then the cell, or room, in which he now was had gradually
materialized round him. He was almost flat on his back, and unable to move.
His body was held down at every essential point. Even the back of his head
was gripped in some manner. O'Brien was looking down at him gravely and
rather sadly. His face, seen from below, looked coarse and worn, with
pouches under the eyes and tired lines from nose to chin. He was older
than Winston had thought him; he was perhaps forty-eight or fifty. Under
his hand there was a dial with a lever on top and figures running round
the face.

'I told you,' said O'Brien, 'that if we met again it would be here.'

'Yes,' said Winston.

Without any warning except a slight movement of O'Brien's hand, a wave of
pain flooded his body. It was a frightening pain, because he could not see
what was happening, and he had the feeling that some mortal injury was
being done to him. He did not know whether the thing was really happening,
or whether the effect was electrically produced; but his body was being
wrenched out of shape, the joints were being slowly torn apart. Although
the pain had brought the sweat out on his forehead, the worst of all was
the fear that his backbone was about to snap. He set his teeth and
breathed hard through his nose, trying to keep silent as long as possible.

'You are afraid,' said O'Brien, watching his face, 'that in another moment
something is going to break. Your especial fear is that it will be your
backbone. You have a vivid mental picture of the vertebrae snapping apart
and the spinal fluid dripping out of them. That is what you are thinking,
is it not, Winston?'

Winston did not answer. O'Brien drew back the lever on the dial. The wave
of pain receded almost as quickly as it had come.

'That was forty,' said O'Brien. 'You can see that the numbers on this dial
run up to a hundred. Will you please remember, throughout our conversation,
that I have it in my power to inflict pain on you at any moment and to
whatever degree I choose? If you tell me any lies, or attempt to
prevaricate in any way, or even fall below your usual level of
intelligence, you will cry out with pain, instantly. Do you understand
that?'

'Yes,' said Winston.

O'Brien's manner became less severe. He resettled his spectacles
thoughtfully, and took a pace or two up and down. When he spoke his voice
was gentle and patient. He had the air of a doctor, a teacher, even a
priest, anxious to explain and persuade rather than to punish.

'I am taking trouble with you, Winston,' he said, 'because you are worth
trouble. You know perfectly well what is the matter with you. You have
known it for years, though you have fought against the knowledge. You are
mentally deranged. You suffer from a defective memory. You are unable to
remember real events and you persuade yourself that you remember other
events which never happened. Fortunately it is curable. You have never
cured yourself of it, because you did not choose to. There was a small
effort of the will that you were not ready to make. Even now, I am well
aware, you are clinging to your disease under the impression that it is
a virtue. Now we will take an example. At this moment, which power is
Oceania at war with?'

'When I was arrested, Oceania was at war with Eastasia.'

'With Eastasia. Good. And Oceania has always been at war with Eastasia,
has it not?'

Winston drew in his breath. He opened his mouth to speak and then did not
speak. He could not take his eyes away from the dial.

'The truth, please, Winston. YOUR truth. Tell me what you think you
remember.'

'I remember that until only a week before I was arrested, we were not at
war with Eastasia at all. We were in alliance with them. The war was
against Eurasia. That had lasted for four years. Before that----'

O'Brien stopped him with a movement of the hand.

'Another example,' he said. 'Some years ago you had a very serious delusion
indeed. You believed that three men, three one-time Party members named
Jones, Aaronson, and Rutherford--men who were executed for treachery and
sabotage after making the fullest possible confession--were not guilty of
the crimes they were charged with. You believed that you had seen
unmistakable documentary evidence proving that their confessions were
false. There was a certain photograph about which you had a hallucination.
You believed that you had actually held it in your hands. It was a
photograph something like this.'

An oblong slip of newspaper had appeared between O'Brien's fingers. For
perhaps five seconds it was within the angle of Winston's vision. It was
a photograph, and there was no question of its identity. It was THE
photograph. It was another copy of the photograph of Jones, Aaronson, and
Rutherford at the party function in New York, which he had chanced upon
eleven years ago and promptly destroyed. For only an instant it was before
his eyes, then it was out of sight again. But he had seen it,
unquestionably he had seen it! He made a desperate, agonizing effort to
wrench the top half of his body free. It was impossible to move so much as
a centimetre in any direction. For the moment he had even forgotten the
dial. All he wanted was to hold the photograph in his fingers again, or at
least to see it.

'It exists!' he cried.

'No,' said O'Brien.

He stepped across the room. There was a memory hole in the opposite wall.
O'Brien lifted the grating. Unseen, the frail slip of paper was whirling
away on the current of warm air; it was vanishing in a flash of flame.
O'Brien turned away from the wall.

'Ashes,' he said. 'Not even identifiable ashes. Dust. It does not exist.
It never existed.'

'But it did exist! It does exist! It exists in memory. I remember it.
You remember it.'

'I do not remember it,' said O'Brien.

Winston's heart sank. That was doublethink. He had a feeling of deadly
helplessness. If he could have been certain that O'Brien was lying, it
would not have seemed to matter. But it was perfectly possible that O'Brien
had really forgotten the photograph. And if so, then already he would have
forgotten his denial of remembering it, and forgotten the act of
forgetting. How could one be sure that it was simple trickery? Perhaps
that lunatic dislocation in the mind could really happen: that was the
thought that defeated him.

O'Brien was looking down at him speculatively. More than ever he had the
air of a teacher taking pains with a wayward but promising child.

'There is a Party slogan dealing with the control of the past,' he said.
'Repeat it, if you please.'

'"Who controls the past controls the future: who controls the present
controls the past,"' repeated Winston obediently.

'"Who controls the present controls the past,"' said O'Brien, nodding his
head with slow approval. 'Is it your opinion, Winston, that the past has
real existence?'

Again the feeling of helplessness descended upon Winston. His eyes flitted
towards the dial. He not only did not know whether 'yes' or 'no' was the
answer that would save him from pain; he did not even know which answer he
believed to be the true one.

O'Brien smiled faintly. 'You are no metaphysician, Winston,' he said.
'Until this moment you had never considered what is meant by existence. I
will put it more precisely. Does the past exist concretely, in space? Is
there somewhere or other a place, a world of solid objects, where the past
is still happening?'

'No.'

'Then where does the past exist, if at all?'

'In records. It is written down.'

'In records. And----?'

'In the mind. In human memories.'

'In memory. Very well, then. We, the Party, control all records, and we
control all memories. Then we control the past, do we not?'

'But how can you stop people remembering things?' cried Winston again
momentarily forgetting the dial. 'It is involuntary. It is outside oneself.
How can you control memory? You have not controlled mine!'

O'Brien's manner grew stern again. He laid his hand on the dial.

'On the contrary,' he said, 'YOU have not controlled it. That is what has
brought you here. You are here because you have failed in humility, in
self-discipline. You would not make the act of submission which is the
price of sanity. You preferred to be a lunatic, a minority of one. Only the
disciplined mind can see reality, Winston. You believe that reality is
something objective, external, existing in its own right. You also believe
that the nature of reality is self-evident. When you delude yourself into
thinking that you see something, you assume that everyone else sees the
same thing as you. But I tell you, Winston, that reality is not external.
Reality exists in the human mind, and nowhere else. Not in the individual
mind, which can make mistakes, and in any case soon perishes: only in the
mind of the Party, which is collective and immortal. Whatever the Party
holds to be the truth, is truth. It is impossible to see reality except by
looking through the eyes of the Party. That is the fact that you have got
to relearn, Winston. It needs an act of self-destruction, an effort of the
will. You must humble yourself before you can become sane.'

He paused for a few moments, as though to allow what he had been saying to
sink in.

'Do you remember,' he went on, 'writing in your diary, "Freedom is the
freedom to say that two plus two make four"?'

'Yes,' said Winston.

O'Brien held up his left hand, its back towards Winston, with the thumb
hidden and the four fingers extended.

'How many fingers am I holding up, Winston?'

'Four.'

'And if the party says that it is not four but five--then how many?'

'Four.'

The word ended in a gasp of pain. The needle of the dial had shot up to
fifty-five. The sweat had sprung out all over Winston's body. The air tore
into his lungs and issued again in deep groans which even by clenching his
teeth he could not stop. O'Brien watched him, the four fingers still
extended. He drew back the lever. This time the pain was only slightly
eased.

'How many fingers, Winston?'

'Four.'

The needle went up to sixty.

'How many fingers, Winston?'

'Four! Four! What else can I say? Four!'

The needle must have risen again, but he did not look at it. The heavy,
stern face and the four fingers filled his vision. The fingers stood up
before his eyes like pillars, enormous, blurry, and seeming to vibrate,
but unmistakably four.

'How many fingers, Winston?'

'Four! Stop it, stop it! How can you go on? Four! Four!'

'How many fingers, Winston?'

'Five! Five! Five!'

'No, Winston, that is no use. You are lying. You still think there are
four. How many fingers, please?'

'Four! five! Four! Anything you like. Only stop it, stop the pain!'

Abruptly he was sitting up with O'Brien's arm round his shoulders. He had
perhaps lost consciousness for a few seconds. The bonds that had held his
body down were loosened. He felt very cold, he was shaking uncontrollably,
his teeth were chattering, the tears were rolling down his cheeks. For a
moment he clung to O'Brien like a baby, curiously comforted by the heavy
arm round his shoulders. He had the feeling that O'Brien was his protector,
that the pain was something that came from outside, from some other source,
and that it was O'Brien who would save him from it.

'You are a slow learner, Winston,' said O'Brien gently.

'How can I help it?' he blubbered. 'How can I help seeing what is in front
of my eyes? Two and two are four.'

'Sometimes, Winston. Sometimes they are five. Sometimes they are three.
Sometimes they are all of them at once. You must try harder. It is not
easy to become sane.'

He laid Winston down on the bed. The grip of his limbs tightened again,
but the pain had ebbed away and the trembling had stopped, leaving him
merely weak and cold. O'Brien motioned with his head to the man in the
white coat, who had stood immobile throughout the proceedings. The man in
the white coat bent down and looked closely into Winston's eyes, felt his
pulse, laid an ear against his chest, tapped here and there, then he
nodded to O'Brien.

'Again,' said O'Brien.

The pain flowed into Winston's body. The needle must be at seventy,
seventy-five. He had shut his eyes this time. He knew that the fingers
were still there, and still four. All that mattered was somehow to stay
alive until the spasm was over. He had ceased to notice whether he was
crying out or not. The pain lessened again. He opened his eyes. O'Brien
had drawn back the lever.

'How many fingers, Winston?'

'Four. I suppose there are four. I would see five if I could. I am trying
to see five.'

'Which do you wish: to persuade me that you see five, or really to see
them?'

'Really to see them.'

'Again,' said O'Brien.

Perhaps the needle was eighty--ninety. Winston could not intermittently
remember why the pain was happening. Behind his screwed-up eyelids a
forest of fingers seemed to be moving in a sort of dance, weaving in and
out, disappearing behind one another and reappearing again. He was trying
to count them, he could not remember why. He knew only that it was
impossible to count them, and that this was somehow due to the mysterious
identity between five and four. The pain died down again. When he opened
his eyes it was to find that he was still seeing the same thing.
Innumerable fingers, like moving trees, were still streaming past in
either direction, crossing and recrossing. He shut his eyes again.

'How many fingers am I holding up, Winston?'

'I don't know. I don't know. You will kill me if you do that again. Four,
five, six--in all honesty I don't know.'

'Better,' said O'Brien.

A needle slid into Winston's arm. Almost in the same instant a blissful,
healing warmth spread all through his body. The pain was already
half-forgotten. He opened his eyes and looked up gratefully at O'Brien.
At sight of the heavy, lined face, so ugly and so intelligent, his heart
seemed to turn over. If he could have moved he would have stretched out
a hand and laid it on O'Brien's arm. He had never loved him so deeply as
at this moment, and not merely because he had stopped the pain. The old
feeling, that at bottom it did not matter whether O'Brien was a friend
or an enemy, had come back. O'Brien was a person who could be talked to.
Perhaps one did not want to be loved so much as to be understood. O'Brien
had tortured him to the edge of lunacy, and in a little while, it was
certain, he would send him to his death. It made no difference. In some
sense that went deeper than friendship, they were intimates: somewhere or
other, although the actual words might never be spoken, there was a place
where they could meet and talk. O'Brien was looking down at him with an
expression which suggested that the same thought might be in his own mind.
When he spoke it was in an easy, conversational tone.

'Do you know where you are, Winston?' he said.

'I don't know. I can guess. In the Ministry of Love.'

'Do you know how long you have been here?'

'I don't know. Days, weeks, months--I think it is months.'

'And why do you imagine that we bring people to this place?'

'To make them confess.'

'No, that is not the reason. Try again.'

'To punish them.'

'No!' exclaimed O'Brien. His voice had changed extraordinarily, and his
face had suddenly become both stern and animated. 'No! Not merely to
extract your confession, not to punish you. Shall I tell you why we have
brought you here? To cure you! To make you sane! Will you understand,
Winston, that no one whom we bring to this place ever leaves our hands
uncured? We are not interested in those stupid crimes that you have
committed. The Party is not interested in the overt act: the thought is
all we care about. We do not merely destroy our enemies, we change them.
Do you understand what I mean by that?'

He was bending over Winston. His face looked enormous because of its
nearness, and hideously ugly because it was seen from below. Moreover it
was filled with a sort of exaltation, a lunatic intensity. Again Winston's
heart shrank. If it had been possible he would have cowered deeper into
the bed. He felt certain that O'Brien was about to twist the dial out of
sheer wantonness. At this moment, however, O'Brien turned away. He took a
pace or two up and down. Then he continued less vehemently:

'The first thing for you to understand is that in this place there are no
martyrdoms. You have read of the religious persecutions of the past. In
the Middle Ages there was the Inquisition. It was a failure. It set out
to eradicate heresy, and ended by perpetuating it. For every heretic it
burned at the stake, thousands of others rose up. Why was that? Because
the Inquisition killed its enemies in the open, and killed them while
they were still unrepentant: in fact, it killed them because they were
unrepentant. Men were dying because they would not abandon their true
beliefs. Naturally all the glory belonged to the victim and all the shame
to the Inquisitor who burned him. Later, in the twentieth century, there
were the totalitarians, as they were called. There were the German Nazis
and the Russian Communists. The Russians persecuted heresy more cruelly
than the Inquisition had done. And they imagined that they had learned
from the mistakes of the past; they knew, at any rate, that one must not
make martyrs. Before they exposed their victims to public trial, they
deliberately set themselves to destroy their dignity. They wore them down
by torture and solitude until they were despicable, cringing wretches,
confessing whatever was put into their mouths, covering themselves with
abuse, accusing and sheltering behind one another, whimpering for mercy.
And yet after only a few years the same thing had happened over again.
The dead men had become martyrs and their degradation was forgotten. Once
again, why was it? In the first place, because the confessions that they
had made were obviously extorted and untrue. We do not make mistakes of
that kind. All the confessions that are uttered here are true. We make
them true. And above all we do not allow the dead to rise up against us.
You must stop imagining that posterity will vindicate you, Winston.
Posterity will never hear of you. You will be lifted clean out from the
stream of history. We shall turn you into gas and pour you into the
stratosphere. Nothing will remain of you, not a name in a register, not
a memory in a living brain. You will be annihilated in the past as well
as in the future. You will never have existed.'

Then why bother to torture me? thought Winston, with a momentary
bitterness. O'Brien checked his step as though Winston had uttered the
thought aloud. His large ugly face came nearer, with the eyes a little
narrowed.

'You are thinking,' he said, 'that since we intend to destroy you utterly,
so that nothing that you say or do can make the smallest difference--in
that case, why do we go to the trouble of interrogating you first? That is
what you were thinking, was it not?'

'Yes,' said Winston.

O'Brien smiled slightly. 'You are a flaw in the pattern, Winston. You are
a stain that must be wiped out. Did I not tell you just now that we are
different from the persecutors of the past? We are not content with
negative obedience, nor even with the most abject submission. When finally
you surrender to us, it must be of your own free will. We do not destroy
the heretic because he resists us: so long as he resists us we never
destroy him. We convert him, we capture his inner mind, we reshape him.
We burn all evil and all illusion out of him; we bring him over to our
side, not in appearance, but genuinely, heart and soul. We make him one of
ourselves before we kill him. It is intolerable to us that an erroneous
thought should exist anywhere in the world, however secret and powerless
it may be. Even in the instant of death we cannot permit any deviation. In
the old days the heretic walked to the stake still a heretic, proclaiming
his heresy, exulting in it. Even the victim of the Russian purges could
carry rebellion locked up in his skull as he walked down the passage
waiting for the bullet. But we make the brain perfect before we blow it
out. The command of the old despotisms was "Thou shalt not". The command
of the totalitarians was "Thou shalt". Our command is "THOU ART". No one
whom we bring to this place ever stands out against us. Everyone is washed
clean. Even those three miserable traitors in whose innocence you once
believed--Jones, Aaronson, and Rutherford--in the end we broke them down.
I took part in their interrogation myself. I saw them gradually worn down,
whimpering, grovelling, weeping--and in the end it was not with pain or
fear, only with penitence. By the time we had finished with them they were
only the shells of men. There was nothing left in them except sorrow for
what they had done, and love of Big Brother. It was touching to see
how they loved him. They begged to be shot quickly, so that they could die
while their minds were still clean.'

His voice had grown almost dreamy. The exaltation, the lunatic enthusiasm,
was still in his face. He is not pretending, thought Winston, he is not a
hypocrite, he believes every word he says. What most oppressed him was the
consciousness of his own intellectual inferiority. He watched the heavy
yet graceful form strolling to and fro, in and out of the range of his
vision. O'Brien was a being in all ways larger than himself. There was no
idea that he had ever had, or could have, that O'Brien had not long ago
known, examined, and rejected. His mind CONTAINED Winston's mind. But
in that case how could it be true that O'Brien was mad? It must be he,
Winston, who was mad. O'Brien halted and looked down at him. His voice had
grown stern again.

'Do not imagine that you will save yourself, Winston, however completely
you surrender to us. No one who has once gone astray is ever spared. And
even if we chose to let you live out the natural term of your life, still
you would never escape from us. What happens to you here is for ever.
Understand that in advance. We shall crush you down to the point from
which there is no coming back. Things will happen to you from which you
could not recover, if you lived a thousand years. Never again will you be
capable of ordinary human feeling. Everything will be dead inside you.
Never again will you be capable of love, or friendship, or joy of living,
or laughter, or curiosity, or courage, or integrity. You will be hollow.
We shall squeeze you empty, and then we shall fill you with ourselves.'

He paused and signed to the man in the white coat. Winston was aware of
some heavy piece of apparatus being pushed into place behind his head.
O'Brien had sat down beside the bed, so that his face was almost on a
level with Winston's.

'Three thousand,' he said, speaking over Winston's head to the man in the
white coat.

Two soft pads, which felt slightly moist, clamped themselves against
Winston's temples. He quailed. There was pain coming, a new kind of pain.
O'Brien laid a hand reassuringly, almost kindly, on his.

'This time it will not hurt,' he said. 'Keep your eyes fixed on mine.'

At this moment there was a devastating explosion, or what seemed like an
explosion, though it was not certain whether there was any noise. There
was undoubtedly a blinding flash of light. Winston was not hurt, only
prostrated. Although he had already been lying on his back when the thing
happened, he had a curious feeling that he had been knocked into that
position. A terrific painless blow had flattened him out. Also something
had happened inside his head. As his eyes regained their focus he
remembered who he was, and where he was, and recognized the face that was
gazing into his own; but somewhere or other there was a large patch of
emptiness, as though a piece had been taken out of his brain.

'It will not last,' said O'Brien. 'Look me in the eyes. What country is
Oceania at war with?'

Winston thought. He knew what was meant by Oceania and that he himself was
a citizen of Oceania. He also remembered Eurasia and Eastasia; but who was
at war with whom he did not know. In fact he had not been aware that there
was any war.

'I don't remember.'

'Oceania is at war with Eastasia. Do you remember that now?'

'Yes.'

'Oceania has always been at war with Eastasia. Since the beginning of your
life, since the beginning of the Party, since the beginning of history,
the war has continued without a break, always the same war. Do you
remember that?'

'Yes.'

'Eleven years ago you created a legend about three men who had been
condemned to death for treachery. You pretended that you had seen a piece
of paper which proved them innocent. No such piece of paper ever existed.
You invented it, and later you grew to believe in it. You remember now the
very moment at which you first invented it. Do you remember that?'

'Yes.'

'Just now I held up the fingers of my hand to you. You saw five fingers.
Do you remember that?'

'Yes.'

O'Brien held up the fingers of his left hand, with the thumb concealed.

'There are five fingers there. Do you see five fingers?'

'Yes.'

And he did see them, for a fleeting instant, before the scenery of his
mind changed. He saw five fingers, and there was no deformity. Then
everything was normal again, and the old fear, the hatred, and the
bewilderment came crowding back again. But there had been a moment--he did
not know how long, thirty seconds, perhaps--of luminous certainty, when
each new suggestion of O'Brien's had filled up a patch of emptiness and
become absolute truth, and when two and two could have been three as
easily as five, if that were what was needed. It had faded but before
O'Brien had dropped his hand; but though he could not recapture it, he
could remember it, as one remembers a vivid experience at some period of
one's life when one was in effect a different person.

'You see now,' said O'Brien, 'that it is at any rate possible.'

'Yes,' said Winston.

O'Brien stood up with a satisfied air. Over to his left Winston saw the
man in the white coat break an ampoule and draw back the plunger of a
syringe. O'Brien turned to Winston with a smile. In almost the old manner
he resettled his spectacles on his nose.

'Do you remember writing in your diary,' he said, 'that it did not matter
whether I was a friend or an enemy, since I was at least a person who
understood you and could be talked to? You were right. I enjoy talking to
you. Your mind appeals to me. It resembles my own mind except that you
happen to be insane. Before we bring the session to an end you can ask me
a few questions, if you choose.'

'Any question I like?'

'Anything.' He saw that Winston's eyes were upon the dial. 'It is switched
off. What is your first question?'

'What have you done with Julia?' said Winston.

O'Brien smiled again. 'She betrayed you, Winston. Immediately--unreservedly.
I have seldom seen anyone come over to us so promptly. You would hardly
recognize her if you saw her. All her rebelliousness, her deceit, her
folly, her dirty-mindedness--everything has been burned out of her. It was
a perfect conversion, a textbook case.'

'You tortured her?'

O'Brien left this unanswered. 'Next question,' he said.

'Does Big Brother exist?'

'Of course he exists. The Party exists. Big Brother is the embodiment of
the Party.'

'Does he exist in the same way as I exist?'

'You do not exist,' said O'Brien.

Once again the sense of helplessness assailed him. He knew, or he could
imagine, the arguments which proved his own nonexistence; but they were
nonsense, they were only a play on words. Did not the statement, 'You do
not exist', contain a logical absurdity? But what use was it to say so?
His mind shrivelled as he thought of the unanswerable, mad arguments with
which O'Brien would demolish him.

'I think I exist,' he said wearily. 'I am conscious of my own identity.
I was born and I shall die. I have arms and legs. I occupy a particular
point in space. No other solid object can occupy the same point
simultaneously. In that sense, does Big Brother exist?'

'It is of no importance. He exists.'

'Will Big Brother ever die?'

'Of course not. How could he die? Next question.'

'Does the Brotherhood exist?'

'That, Winston, you will never know. If we choose to set you free when we
have finished with you, and if you live to be ninety years old, still you
will never learn whether the answer to that question is Yes or No. As long
as you live it will be an unsolved riddle in your mind.'

Winston lay silent. His breast rose and fell a little faster. He still had
not asked the question that had come into his mind the first. He had got
to ask it, and yet it was as though his tongue would not utter it. There
was a trace of amusement in O'Brien's face. Even his spectacles seemed to
wear an ironical gleam. He knows, thought Winston suddenly, he knows what
I am going to ask! At the thought the words burst out of him:

'What is in Room 101?'

The expression on O'Brien's face did not change. He answered drily:

'You know what is in Room 101, Winston. Everyone knows what is in
Room 101.'

He raised a finger to the man in the white coat. Evidently the session was
at an end. A needle jerked into Winston's arm. He sank almost instantly
into deep sleep.




Chapter 3



'There are three stages in your reintegration,' said O'Brien. 'There is
learning, there is understanding, and there is acceptance. It is time for
you to enter upon the second stage.'

As always, Winston was lying flat on his back. But of late his bonds were
looser. They still held him to the bed, but he could move his knees a
little and could turn his head from side to side and raise his arms from
the elbow. The dial, also, had grown to be less of a terror. He could
evade its pangs if he was quick-witted enough: it was chiefly when he
showed stupidity that O'Brien pulled the lever. Sometimes they got through
a whole session without use of the dial. He could not remember how many
sessions there had been. The whole process seemed to stretch out over a
long, indefinite time--weeks, possibly--and the intervals between the
sessions might sometimes have been days, sometimes only an hour or two.

'As you lie there,' said O'Brien, 'you have often wondered--you have even
asked me--why the Ministry of Love should expend so much time and trouble
on you. And when you were free you were puzzled by what was essentially
the same question. You could grasp the mechanics of the Society you lived
in, but not its underlying motives. Do you remember writing in your diary,
"I understand HOW: I do not understand WHY"? It was when you thought about
"why" that you doubted your own sanity. You have read THE BOOK,
Goldstein's book, or parts of it, at least. Did it tell you anything that
you did not know already?'

'You have read it?' said Winston.

'I wrote it. That is to say, I collaborated in writing it. No book is
produced individually, as you know.'

'Is it true, what it says?'

'As description, yes. The programme it sets forth is nonsense. The secret
accumulation of knowledge--a gradual spread of enlightenment--ultimately
a proletarian rebellion--the overthrow of the Party. You foresaw yourself
that that was what it would say. It is all nonsense. The proletarians will
never revolt, not in a thousand years or a million. They cannot. I do
not have to tell you the reason: you know it already. If you have ever
cherished any dreams of violent insurrection, you must abandon them. There
is no way in which the Party can be overthrown. The rule of the Party is
for ever. Make that the starting-point of your thoughts.'

He came closer to the bed. 'For ever!' he repeated. 'And now let us get
back to the question of "how" and "why". You understand well enough HOW
the Party maintains itself in power. Now tell me WHY we cling to power.
What is our motive? Why should we want power? Go on, speak,' he added as
Winston remained silent.

Nevertheless Winston did not speak for another moment or two. A feeling of
weariness had overwhelmed him. The faint, mad gleam of enthusiasm had come
back into O'Brien's face. He knew in advance what O'Brien would say. That
the Party did not seek power for its own ends, but only for the good of
the majority. That it sought power because men in the mass were frail,
cowardly creatures who could not endure liberty or face the truth, and
must be ruled over and systematically deceived by others who were stronger
than themselves. That the choice for mankind lay between freedom and
happiness, and that, for the great bulk of mankind, happiness was better.
That the party was the eternal guardian of the weak, a dedicated sect
doing evil that good might come, sacrificing its own happiness to that of
others. The terrible thing, thought Winston, the terrible thing was that
when O'Brien said this he would believe it. You could see it in his face.
O'Brien knew everything. A thousand times better than Winston he knew what
the world was really like, in what degradation the mass of human beings
lived and by what lies and barbarities the Party kept them there. He had
understood it all, weighed it all, and it made no difference: all was
justified by the ultimate purpose. What can you do, thought Winston,
against the lunatic who is more intelligent than yourself, who gives your
arguments a fair hearing and then simply persists in his lunacy?

'You are ruling over us for our own good,' he said feebly. 'You believe
that human beings are not fit to govern themselves, and therefore----'

He started and almost cried out. A pang of pain had shot through his body.
O'Brien had pushed the lever of the dial up to thirty-five.

'That was stupid, Winston, stupid!' he said. 'You should know better than
to say a thing like that.'

He pulled the lever back and continued:

'Now I will tell you the answer to my question. It is this. The Party
seeks power entirely for its own sake. We are not interested in the good
of others; we are interested solely in power. Not wealth or luxury or long
life or happiness: only power, pure power. What pure power means you will
understand presently. We are different from all the oligarchies of the
past, in that we know what we are doing. All the others, even those who
resembled ourselves, were cowards and hypocrites. The German Nazis and the
Russian Communists came very close to us in their methods, but they never
had the courage to recognize their own motives. They pretended, perhaps
they even believed, that they had seized power unwillingly and for a
limited time, and that just round the corner there lay a paradise where
human beings would be free and equal. We are not like that. We know that
no one ever seizes power with the intention of relinquishing it. Power is
not a means, it is an end. One does not establish a dictatorship in order
to safeguard a revolution; one makes the revolution in order to establish
the dictatorship. The object of persecution is persecution. The object of
torture is torture. The object of power is power. Now do you begin to
understand me?'

Winston was struck, as he had been struck before, by the tiredness of
O'Brien's face. It was strong and fleshy and brutal, it was full of
intelligence and a sort of controlled passion before which he felt himself
helpless; but it was tired. There were pouches under the eyes, the skin
sagged from the cheekbones. O'Brien leaned over him, deliberately bringing
the worn face nearer.

'You are thinking,' he said, 'that my face is old and tired. You are
thinking that I talk of power, and yet I am not even able to prevent the
decay of my own body. Can you not understand, Winston, that the individual
is only a cell? The weariness of the cell is the vigour of the organism.
Do you die when you cut your fingernails?'

He turned away from the bed and began strolling up and down again, one hand
in his pocket.

'We are the priests of power,' he said. 'God is power. But at present
power is only a word so far as you are concerned. It is time for you to
gather some idea of what power means. The first thing you must realize
is that power is collective. The individual only has power in so far as
he ceases to be an individual. You know the Party slogan: "Freedom is
Slavery". Has it ever occurred to you that it is reversible? Slavery is
freedom. Alone--free--the human being is always defeated. It must be so,
because every human being is doomed to die, which is the greatest of all
failures. But if he can make complete, utter submission, if he can escape
from his identity, if he can merge himself in the Party so that he IS the
Party, then he is all-powerful and immortal. The second thing for you to
realize is that power is power over human beings. Over the body--but, above
all, over the mind. Power over matter--external reality, as you would call
it--is not important. Already our control over matter is absolute.'

For a moment Winston ignored the dial. He made a violent effort to raise
himself into a sitting position, and merely succeeded in wrenching his
body painfully.

'But how can you control matter?' he burst out. 'You don't even control
the climate or the law of gravity. And there are disease, pain, death----'

O'Brien silenced him by a movement of his hand. 'We control matter because
we control the mind. Reality is inside the skull. You will learn by
degrees, Winston. There is nothing that we could not do. Invisibility,
levitation--anything. I could float off this floor like a soap bubble if
I wish to. I do not wish to, because the Party does not wish it. You must
get rid of those nineteenth-century ideas about the laws of Nature. We
make the laws of Nature.'

'But you do not! You are not even masters of this planet. What about
Eurasia and Eastasia? You have not conquered them yet.'

'Unimportant. We shall conquer them when it suits us. And if we did not,
what difference would it make? We can shut them out of existence. Oceania
is the world.'

'But the world itself is only a speck of dust. And man is tiny--helpless!
How long has he been in existence? For millions of years the earth was
uninhabited.'

'Nonsense. The earth is as old as we are, no older. How could it be older?
Nothing exists except through human consciousness.'

'But the rocks are full of the bones of extinct animals--mammoths and
mastodons and enormous reptiles which lived here long before man was ever
heard of.'

'Have you ever seen those bones, Winston? Of course not. Nineteenth-century
biologists invented them. Before man there was nothing. After man, if he
could come to an end, there would be nothing. Outside man there is
nothing.'

'But the whole universe is outside us. Look at the stars! Some of them are
a million light-years away. They are out of our reach for ever.'

'What are the stars?' said O'Brien indifferently. 'They are bits of fire
a few kilometres away. We could reach them if we wanted to. Or we could
blot them out. The earth is the centre of the universe. The sun and the
stars go round it.'

Winston made another convulsive movement. This time he did not say
anything. O'Brien continued as though answering a spoken objection:

'For certain purposes, of course, that is not true. When we navigate the
ocean, or when we predict an eclipse, we often find it convenient to
assume that the earth goes round the sun and that the stars are millions
upon millions of kilometres away. But what of it? Do you suppose it is
beyond us to produce a dual system of astronomy? The stars can be near
or distant, according as we need them. Do you suppose our mathematicians
are unequal to that? Have you forgotten doublethink?'

Winston shrank back upon the bed. Whatever he said, the swift answer
crushed him like a bludgeon. And yet he knew, he KNEW, that he was in the
right. The belief that nothing exists outside your own mind--surely there
must be some way of demonstrating that it was false? Had it not been
exposed long ago as a fallacy? There was even a name for it, which he
had forgotten. A faint smile twitched the corners of O'Brien's mouth as
he looked down at him.

'I told you, Winston,' he said, 'that metaphysics is not your strong
point. The word you are trying to think of is solipsism. But you are
mistaken. This is not solipsism. Collective solipsism, if you like. But
that is a different thing: in fact, the opposite thing. All this is a
digression,' he added in a different tone. 'The real power, the power we
have to fight for night and day, is not power over things, but over men.'
He paused, and for a moment assumed again his air of a schoolmaster
questioning a promising pupil: 'How does one man assert his power over
another, Winston?'

Winston thought. 'By making him suffer,' he said.

'Exactly. By making him suffer. Obedience is not enough. Unless he is
suffering, how can you be sure that he is obeying your will and not his
own? Power is in inflicting pain and humiliation. Power is in tearing
human minds to pieces and putting them together again in new shapes of
your own choosing. Do you begin to see, then, what kind of world we are
creating? It is the exact opposite of the stupid hedonistic Utopias that
the old reformers imagined. A world of fear and treachery and torment, a
world of trampling and being trampled upon, a world which will grow not
less but MORE merciless as it refines itself. Progress in our world will
be progress towards more pain. The old civilizations claimed that they
were founded on love or justice. Ours is founded upon hatred. In our world
there will be no emotions except fear, rage, triumph, and self-abasement.
Everything else we shall destroy--everything. Already we are breaking down
the habits of thought which have survived from before the Revolution. We
have cut the links between child and parent, and between man and man, and
between man and woman. No one dares trust a wife or a child or a friend
any longer. But in the future there will be no wives and no friends.
Children will be taken from their mothers at birth, as one takes eggs from
a hen. The sex instinct will be eradicated. Procreation will be an annual
formality like the renewal of a ration card. We shall abolish the orgasm.
Our neurologists are at work upon it now. There will be no loyalty, except
loyalty towards the Party. There will be no love, except the love of
Big Brother. There will be no laughter, except the laugh of triumph over
a defeated enemy. There will be no art, no literature, no science. When
we are omnipotent we shall have no more need of science. There will be
no distinction between beauty and ugliness. There will be no curiosity,
no enjoyment of the process of life. All competing pleasures will be
destroyed. But always--do not forget this, Winston--always there will be
the intoxication of power, constantly increasing and constantly growing
subtler. Always, at every moment, there will be the thrill of victory,
the sensation of trampling on an enemy who is helpless. If you want a
picture of the future, imagine a boot stamping on a human face--for ever.'

He paused as though he expected Winston to speak. Winston had tried to
shrink back into the surface of the bed again. He could not say anything.
His heart seemed to be frozen. O'Brien went on:

'And remember that it is for ever. The face will always be there to be
stamped upon. The heretic, the enemy of society, will always be there, so
that he can be defeated and humiliated over again. Everything that you
have undergone since you have been in our hands--all that will continue,
and worse. The espionage, the betrayals, the arrests, the tortures, the
executions, the disappearances will never cease. It will be a world of
terror as much as a world of triumph. The more the Party is powerful, the
less it will be tolerant: the weaker the opposition, the tighter the
despotism. Goldstein and his heresies will live for ever. Every day, at
every moment, they will be defeated, discredited, ridiculed, spat upon and
yet they will always survive. This drama that I have played out with you
during seven years will be played out over and over again generation after
generation, always in subtler forms. Always we shall have the heretic here
at our mercy, screaming with pain, broken up, contemptible--and in the end
utterly penitent, saved from himself, crawling to our feet of his own
accord. That is the world that we are preparing, Winston. A world of
victory after victory, triumph after triumph after triumph: an endless
pressing, pressing, pressing upon the nerve of power. You are beginning,
I can see, to realize what that world will be like. But in the end you
will do more than understand it. You will accept it, welcome it, become
part of it.'

Winston had recovered himself sufficiently to speak. 'You can't!' he said
weakly.

'What do you mean by that remark, Winston?'

'You could not create such a world as you have just described. It is a
dream. It is impossible.'

'Why?'

'It is impossible to found a civilization on fear and hatred and cruelty.
It would never endure.'

'Why not?'

'It would have no vitality. It would disintegrate. It would commit
suicide.'

'Nonsense. You are under the impression that hatred is more exhausting
than love. Why should it be? And if it were, what difference would that
make? Suppose that we choose to wear ourselves out faster. Suppose that we
quicken the tempo of human life till men are senile at thirty. Still what
difference would it make? Can you not understand that the death of the
individual is not death? The party is immortal.'

As usual, the voice had battered Winston into helplessness. Moreover he
was in dread that if he persisted in his disagreement O'Brien would twist
the dial again. And yet he could not keep silent. Feebly, without
arguments, with nothing to support him except his inarticulate horror of
what O'Brien had said, he returned to the attack.

'I don't know--I don't care. Somehow you will fail. Something will defeat
you. Life will defeat you.'

'We control life, Winston, at all its levels. You are imagining that there
is something called human nature which will be outraged by what we do and
will turn against us. But we create human nature. Men are infinitely
malleable. Or perhaps you have returned to your old idea that the
proletarians or the slaves will arise and overthrow us. Put it out of your
mind. They are helpless, like the animals. Humanity is the Party. The
others are outside--irrelevant.'

'I don't care. In the end they will beat you. Sooner or later they will
see you for what you are, and then they will tear you to pieces.'

'Do you see any evidence that that is happening? Or any reason why it
should?'

'No. I believe it. I KNOW that you will fail. There is something in the
universe--I don't know, some spirit, some principle--that you will never
overcome.'

'Do you believe in God, Winston?'

'No.'

'Then what is it, this principle that will defeat us?'

'I don't know. The spirit of Man.'

'And do you consider yourself a man?'

'Yes.'

'If you are a man, Winston, you are the last man. Your kind is extinct; we
are the inheritors. Do you understand that you are ALONE? You are outside
history, you are non-existent.' His manner changed and he said more
harshly: 'And you consider yourself morally superior to us, with our lies
and our cruelty?'

'Yes, I consider myself superior.'

O'Brien did not speak. Two other voices were speaking. After a moment
Winston recognized one of them as his own. It was a sound-track of the
conversation he had had with O'Brien, on the night when he had enrolled
himself in the Brotherhood. He heard himself promising to lie, to steal,
to forge, to murder, to encourage drug-taking and prostitution, to
disseminate venereal diseases, to throw vitriol in a child's face. O'Brien
made a small impatient gesture, as though to say that the demonstration
was hardly worth making. Then he turned a switch and the voices stopped.

'Get up from that bed,' he said.

The bonds had loosened themselves. Winston lowered himself to the floor
and stood up unsteadily.

'You are the last man,' said O'Brien. 'You are the guardian of the human
spirit. You shall see yourself as you are. Take off your clothes.'

Winston undid the bit of string that held his overalls together. The zip
fastener had long since been wrenched out of them. He could not remember
whether at any time since his arrest he had taken off all his clothes at
one time. Beneath the overalls his body was looped with filthy yellowish
rags, just recognizable as the remnants of underclothes. As he slid
them to the ground he saw that there was a three-sided mirror at the far
end of the room. He approached it, then stopped short. An involuntary cry
had broken out of him.

'Go on,' said O'Brien. 'Stand between the wings of the mirror. You shall
see the side view as well.'

He had stopped because he was frightened. A bowed, grey-coloured,
skeleton-like thing was coming towards him. Its actual appearance was
frightening, and not merely the fact that he knew it to be himself. He
moved closer to the glass. The creature's face seemed to be protruded,
because of its bent carriage. A forlorn, jailbird's face with a nobby
forehead running back into a bald scalp, a crooked nose, and
battered-looking cheekbones above which his eyes were fierce and watchful.
The cheeks were seamed, the mouth had a drawn-in look. Certainly it was
his own face, but it seemed to him that it had changed more than he had
changed inside. The emotions it registered would be different from the
ones he felt. He had gone partially bald. For the first moment he had
thought that he had gone grey as well, but it was only the scalp that was
grey. Except for his hands and a circle of his face, his body was grey all
over with ancient, ingrained dirt. Here and there under the dirt there
were the red scars of wounds, and near the ankle the varicose ulcer was an
inflamed mass with flakes of skin peeling off it. But the truly frightening
thing was the emaciation of his body. The barrel of the ribs was as narrow
as that of a skeleton: the legs had shrunk so that the knees were thicker
than the thighs. He saw now what O'Brien had meant about seeing the side
view. The curvature of the spine was astonishing. The thin shoulders were
hunched forward so as to make a cavity of the chest, the scraggy neck
seemed to be bending double under the weight of the skull. At a guess he
would have said that it was the body of a man of sixty, suffering from
some malignant disease.

'You have thought sometimes,' said O'Brien, 'that my face--the face of a
member of the Inner Party--looks old and worn. What do you think of your
own face?'

He seized Winston's shoulder and spun him round so that he was facing him.

'Look at the condition you are in!' he said. 'Look at this filthy grime
all over your body. Look at the dirt between your toes. Look at that
disgusting running sore on your leg. Do you know that you stink like a
goat? Probably you have ceased to notice it. Look at your emaciation. Do
you see? I can make my thumb and forefinger meet round your bicep. I could
snap your neck like a carrot. Do you know that you have lost twenty-five
kilograms since you have been in our hands? Even your hair is coming out
in handfuls. Look!' He plucked at Winston's head and brought away a tuft
of hair. 'Open your mouth. Nine, ten, eleven teeth left. How many had you
when you came to us? And the few you have left are dropping out of your
head. Look here!'

He seized one of Winston's remaining front teeth between his powerful
thumb and forefinger. A twinge of pain shot through Winston's jaw. O'Brien
had wrenched the loose tooth out by the roots. He tossed it across the
cell.

'You are rotting away,' he said; 'you are falling to pieces. What are you?
A bag of filth. Now turn around and look into that mirror again. Do you
see that thing facing you? That is the last man. If you are human, that is
humanity. Now put your clothes on again.'

Winston began to dress himself with slow stiff movements. Until now he had
not seemed to notice how thin and weak he was. Only one thought stirred in
his mind: that he must have been in this place longer than he had imagined.
Then suddenly as he fixed the miserable rags round himself a feeling of
pity for his ruined body overcame him. Before he knew what he was doing
he had collapsed on to a small stool that stood beside the bed and burst
into tears. He was aware of his ugliness, his gracelessness, a bundle of
bones in filthy underclothes sitting weeping in the harsh white light: but
he could not stop himself. O'Brien laid a hand on his shoulder, almost
kindly.

'It will not last for ever,' he said. 'You can escape from it whenever you
choose. Everything depends on yourself.'

'You did it!' sobbed Winston. 'You reduced me to this state.'

'No, Winston, you reduced yourself to it. This is what you accepted when
you set yourself up against the Party. It was all contained in that first
act. Nothing has happened that you did not foresee.'

He paused, and then went on:

'We have beaten you, Winston. We have broken you up. You have seen what
your body is like. Your mind is in the same state. I do not think there
can be much pride left in you. You have been kicked and flogged and
insulted, you have screamed with pain, you have rolled on the floor in
your own blood and vomit. You have whimpered for mercy, you have betrayed
everybody and everything. Can you think of a single degradation that has
not happened to you?'

Winston had stopped weeping, though the tears were still oozing out of his
eyes. He looked up at O'Brien.

'I have not betrayed Julia,' he said.

O'Brien looked down at him thoughtfully. 'No,' he said; 'no; that is
perfectly true. You have not betrayed Julia.'

The peculiar reverence for O'Brien, which nothing seemed able to destroy,
flooded Winston's heart again. How intelligent, he thought, how
intelligent! Never did O'Brien fail to understand what was said to him.
Anyone else on earth would have answered promptly that he HAD betrayed
Julia. For what was there that they had not screwed out of him under the
torture? He had told them everything he knew about her, her habits, her
character, her past life; he had confessed in the most trivial detail
everything that had happened at their meetings, all that he had said to
her and she to him, their black-market meals, their adulteries, their
vague plottings against the Party--everything. And yet, in the sense in
which he intended the word, he had not betrayed her. He had not stopped
loving her; his feelings towards her had remained the same. O'Brien had
seen what he meant without the need for explanation.

'Tell me,' he said, 'how soon will they shoot me?'

'It might be a long time,' said O'Brien. 'You are a difficult case. But
don't give up hope. Everyone is cured sooner or later. In the end we shall
shoot you.'




Chapter 4



He was much better. He was growing fatter and stronger every day, if it
was proper to speak of days.

The white light and the humming sound were the same as ever, but the cell
was a little more comfortable than the others he had been in. There was a
pillow and a mattress on the plank bed, and a stool to sit on. They had
given him a bath, and they allowed him to wash himself fairly frequently
in a tin basin. They even gave him warm water to wash with. They had given
him new underclothes and a clean suit of overalls. They had dressed his
varicose ulcer with soothing ointment. They had pulled out the remnants
of his teeth and given him a new set of dentures.

Weeks or months must have passed. It would have been possible now to keep
count of the passage of time, if he had felt any interest in doing so,
since he was being fed at what appeared to be regular intervals. He was
getting, he judged, three meals in the twenty-four hours; sometimes he
wondered dimly whether he was getting them by night or by day. The food
was surprisingly good, with meat at every third meal. Once there was even
a packet of cigarettes. He had no matches, but the never-speaking guard
who brought his food would give him a light. The first time he tried to
smoke it made him sick, but he persevered, and spun the packet out for
a long time, smoking half a cigarette after each meal.

They had given him a white slate with a stump of pencil tied to the
corner. At first he made no use of it. Even when he was awake he was
completely torpid. Often he would lie from one meal to the next almost
without stirring, sometimes asleep, sometimes waking into vague reveries
in which it was too much trouble to open his eyes. He had long grown
used to sleeping with a strong light on his face. It seemed to make no
difference, except that one's dreams were more coherent. He dreamed a
great deal all through this time, and they were always happy dreams. He
was in the Golden Country, or he was sitting among enormous glorious,
sunlit ruins, with his mother, with Julia, with O'Brien--not doing
anything, merely sitting in the sun, talking of peaceful things. Such
thoughts as he had when he was awake were mostly about his dreams. He
seemed to have lost the power of intellectual effort, now that the
stimulus of pain had been removed. He was not bored, he had no desire
for conversation or distraction. Merely to be alone, not to be beaten
or questioned, to have enough to eat, and to be clean all over, was
completely satisfying.

By degrees he came to spend less time in sleep, but he still felt no
impulse to get off the bed. All he cared for was to lie quiet and feel the
strength gathering in his body. He would finger himself here and there,
trying to make sure that it was not an illusion that his muscles were
growing rounder and his skin tauter. Finally it was established beyond a
doubt that he was growing fatter; his thighs were now definitely thicker
than his knees. After that, reluctantly at first, he began exercising
himself regularly. In a little while he could walk three kilometres,
measured by pacing the cell, and his bowed shoulders were growing
straighter. He attempted more elaborate exercises, and was astonished and
humiliated to find what things he could not do. He could not move out of a
walk, he could not hold his stool out at arm's length, he could not stand
on one leg without falling over. He squatted down on his heels, and found
that with agonizing pains in thigh and calf he could just lift himself to
a standing position. He lay flat on his belly and tried to lift his weight
by his hands. It was hopeless, he could not raise himself a centimetre.
But after a few more days--a few more mealtimes--even that feat was
accomplished. A time came when he could do it six times running. He began
to grow actually proud of his body, and to cherish an intermittent belief
that his face also was growing back to normal. Only when he chanced to put
his hand on his bald scalp did he remember the seamed, ruined face that
had looked back at him out of the mirror.

His mind grew more active. He sat down on the plank bed, his back against
the wall and the slate on his knees, and set to work deliberately at the
task of re-educating himself.

He had capitulated, that was agreed. In reality, as he saw now, he had
been ready to capitulate long before he had taken the decision. From the
moment when he was inside the Ministry of Love--and yes, even during those
minutes when he and Julia had stood helpless while the iron voice from the
telescreen told them what to do--he had grasped the frivolity, the
shallowness of his attempt to set himself up against the power of the
Party. He knew now that for seven years the Thought Police had watched him
like a beetle under a magnifying glass. There was no physical act, no word
spoken aloud, that they had not noticed, no train of thought that they had
not been able to infer. Even the speck of whitish dust on the cover of his
diary they had carefully replaced. They had played sound-tracks to him,
shown him photographs. Some of them were photographs of Julia and himself.
Yes, even... He could not fight against the Party any longer. Besides,
the Party was in the right. It must be so; how could the immortal,
collective brain be mistaken? By what external standard could you check
its judgements? Sanity was statistical. It was merely a question of
learning to think as they thought. Only----!

The pencil felt thick and awkward in his fingers. He began to write down
the thoughts that came into his head. He wrote first in large clumsy
capitals:


FREEDOM IS SLAVERY


Then almost without a pause he wrote beneath it:


TWO AND TWO MAKE FIVE


But then there came a sort of check. His mind, as though shying away from
something, seemed unable to concentrate. He knew that he knew what came
next, but for the moment he could not recall it. When he did recall it,
it was only by consciously reasoning out what it must be: it did not come
of its own accord. He wrote:


GOD IS POWER


He accepted everything. The past was alterable. The past never had been
altered. Oceania was at war with Eastasia. Oceania had always been at war
with Eastasia. Jones, Aaronson, and Rutherford were guilty of the crimes
they were charged with. He had never seen the photograph that disproved
their guilt. It had never existed, he had invented it. He remembered
remembering contrary things, but those were false memories, products of
self-deception. How easy it all was! Only surrender, and everything else
followed. It was like swimming against a current that swept you backwards
however hard you struggled, and then suddenly deciding to turn round and
go with the current instead of opposing it. Nothing had changed except
your own attitude: the predestined thing happened in any case. He hardly
knew why he had ever rebelled. Everything was easy, except----!

Anything could be true. The so-called laws of Nature were nonsense. The
law of gravity was nonsense. 'If I wished,' O'Brien had said, 'I could
float off this floor like a soap bubble.' Winston worked it out. 'If he
THINKS he floats off the floor, and if I simultaneously THINK I see him
do it, then the thing happens.' Suddenly, like a lump of submerged wreckage
breaking the surface of water, the thought burst into his mind: 'It doesn't
really happen. We imagine it. It is hallucination.' He pushed the thought
under instantly. The fallacy was obvious. It presupposed that somewhere
or other, outside oneself, there was a 'real' world where 'real' things
happened. But how could there be such a world? What knowledge have we of
anything, save through our own minds? All happenings are in the mind.
Whatever happens in all minds, truly happens.

He had no difficulty in disposing of the fallacy, and he was in no danger
of succumbing to it. He realized, nevertheless, that it ought never to
have occurred to him. The mind should develop a blind spot whenever a
dangerous thought presented itself. The process should be automatic,
instinctive. CRIMESTOP, they called it in Newspeak.

He set to work to exercise himself in crimestop. He presented himself with
propositions--'the Party says the earth is flat', 'the party says that
ice is heavier than water'--and trained himself in not seeing or not
understanding the arguments that contradicted them. It was not easy.
It needed great powers of reasoning and improvisation. The arithmetical
problems raised, for instance, by such a statement as 'two and two make
five' were beyond his intellectual grasp. It needed also a sort of
athleticism of mind, an ability at one moment to make the most delicate
use of logic and at the next to be unconscious of the crudest logical
errors. Stupidity was as necessary as intelligence, and as difficult to
attain.

All the while, with one part of his mind, he wondered how soon they would
shoot him. 'Everything depends on yourself,' O'Brien had said; but he knew
that there was no conscious act by which he could bring it nearer. It
might be ten minutes hence, or ten years. They might keep him for years in
solitary confinement, they might send him to a labour-camp, they might
release him for a while, as they sometimes did. It was perfectly possible
that before he was shot the whole drama of his arrest and interrogation
would be enacted all over again. The one certain thing was that death
never came at an expected moment. The tradition--the unspoken tradition:
somehow you knew it, though you never heard it said--was that they shot
you from behind; always in the back of the head, without warning, as you
walked down a corridor from cell to cell.

One day--but 'one day' was not the right expression; just as probably it
was in the middle of the night: once--he fell into a strange, blissful
reverie. He was walking down the corridor, waiting for the bullet. He knew
that it was coming in another moment. Everything was settled, smoothed
out, reconciled. There were no more doubts, no more arguments, no more
pain, no more fear. His body was healthy and strong. He walked easily,
with a joy of movement and with a feeling of walking in sunlight. He was
not any longer in the narrow white corridors in the Ministry of Love, he
was in the enormous sunlit passage, a kilometre wide, down which he had
seemed to walk in the delirium induced by drugs. He was in the Golden
Country, following the foot-track across the old rabbit-cropped pasture.
He could feel the short springy turf under his feet and the gentle sunshine
on his face. At the edge of the field were the elm trees, faintly stirring,
and somewhere beyond that was the stream where the dace lay in the green
pools under the willows.

Suddenly he started up with a shock of horror. The sweat broke out on his
backbone. He had heard himself cry aloud:

'Julia! Julia! Julia, my love! Julia!'

For a moment he had had an overwhelming hallucination of her presence. She
had seemed to be not merely with him, but inside him. It was as though she
had got into the texture of his skin. In that moment he had loved her far
more than he had ever done when they were together and free. Also he knew
that somewhere or other she was still alive and needed his help.

He lay back on the bed and tried to compose himself. What had he done? How
many years had he added to his servitude by that moment of weakness?

In another moment he would hear the tramp of boots outside. They could not
let such an outburst go unpunished. They would know now, if they had not
known before, that he was breaking the agreement he had made with them.
He obeyed the Party, but he still hated the Party. In the old days he had
hidden a heretical mind beneath an appearance of conformity. Now he had
retreated a step further: in the mind he had surrendered, but he had hoped
to keep the inner heart inviolate. He knew that he was in the wrong, but
he preferred to be in the wrong. They would understand that--O'Brien would
understand it. It was all confessed in that single foolish cry.

He would have to start all over again. It might take years. He ran a hand
over his face, trying to familiarize himself with the new shape. There
were deep furrows in the cheeks, the cheekbones felt sharp, the nose
flattened. Besides, since last seeing himself in the glass he had been
given a complete new set of teeth. It was not easy to preserve
inscrutability when you did not know what your face looked like. In any
case, mere control of the features was not enough. For the first time he
perceived that if you want to keep a secret you must also hide it from
yourself. You must know all the while that it is there, but until it is
needed you must never let it emerge into your consciousness in any shape
that could be given a name. From now onwards he must not only think right;
he must feel right, dream right. And all the while he must keep his hatred
locked up inside him like a ball of matter which was part of himself and
yet unconnected with the rest of him, a kind of cyst.

One day they would decide to shoot him. You could not tell when it would
happen, but a few seconds beforehand it should be possible to guess. It
was always from behind, walking down a corridor. Ten seconds would be
enough. In that time the world inside him could turn over. And then
suddenly, without a word uttered, without a check in his step, without the
changing of a line in his face--suddenly the camouflage would be down and
bang! would go the batteries of his hatred. Hatred would fill him like an
enormous roaring flame. And almost in the same instant bang! would go the
bullet, too late, or too early. They would have blown his brain to pieces
before they could reclaim it. The heretical thought would be unpunished,
unrepented, out of their reach for ever. They would have blown a hole in
their own perfection. To die hating them, that was freedom.

He shut his eyes. It was more difficult than accepting an intellectual
discipline. It was a question of degrading himself, mutilating himself. He
had got to plunge into the filthiest of filth. What was the most horrible,
sickening thing of all? He thought of Big Brother. The enormous face
(because of constantly seeing it on posters he always thought of it as
being a metre wide), with its heavy black moustache and the eyes that
followed you to and fro, seemed to float into his mind of its own accord.
What were his true feelings towards Big Brother?

There was a heavy tramp of boots in the passage. The steel door swung open
with a clang. O'Brien walked into the cell. Behind him were the waxen-faced
officer and the black-uniformed guards.

'Get up,' said O'Brien. 'Come here.'

Winston stood opposite him. O'Brien took Winston's shoulders between his
strong hands and looked at him closely.

'You have had thoughts of deceiving me,' he said. 'That was stupid.
Stand up straighter. Look me in the face.'

He paused, and went on in a gentler tone:

'You are improving. Intellectually there is very little wrong with you.
It is only emotionally that you have failed to make progress. Tell me,
Winston--and remember, no lies: you know that I am always able to detect
a lie--tell me, what are your true feelings towards Big Brother?'

'I hate him.'

'You hate him. Good. Then the time has come for you to take the last step.
You must love Big Brother. It is not enough to obey him: you must love
him.'

He released Winston with a little push towards the guards.

'Room 101,' he said.




Chapter 5



At each stage of his imprisonment he had known, or seemed to know,
whereabouts he was in the windowless building. Possibly there were slight
differences in the air pressure. The cells where the guards had beaten him
were below ground level. The room where he had been interrogated by
O'Brien was high up near the roof. This place was many metres underground,
as deep down as it was possible to go.

It was bigger than most of the cells he had been in. But he hardly noticed
his surroundings. All he noticed was that there were two small tables
straight in front of him, each covered with green baize. One was only a
metre or two from him, the other was further away, near the door. He was
strapped upright in a chair, so tightly that he could move nothing, not
even his head. A sort of pad gripped his head from behind, forcing him to
look straight in front of him.

For a moment he was alone, then the door opened and O'Brien came in.

'You asked me once,' said O'Brien, 'what was in Room 101. I told you that
you knew the answer already. Everyone knows it. The thing that is in
Room 101 is the worst thing in the world.'

The door opened again. A guard came in, carrying something made of wire,
a box or basket of some kind. He set it down on the further table. Because
of the position in which O'Brien was standing. Winston could not see what
the thing was.

'The worst thing in the world,' said O'Brien, 'varies from individual to
individual. It may be burial alive, or death by fire, or by drowning, or
by impalement, or fifty other deaths. There are cases where it is some
quite trivial thing, not even fatal.'

He had moved a little to one side, so that Winston had a better view of
the thing on the table. It was an oblong wire cage with a handle on top
for carrying it by. Fixed to the front of it was something that looked
like a fencing mask, with the concave side outwards. Although it was three
or four metres away from him, he could see that the cage was divided
lengthways into two compartments, and that there was some kind of creature
in each. They were rats.

'In your case,' said O'Brien, 'the worst thing in the world happens to be
rats.'

A sort of premonitory tremor, a fear of he was not certain what, had
passed through Winston as soon as he caught his first glimpse of the cage.
But at this moment the meaning of the mask-like attachment in front of it
suddenly sank into him. His bowels seemed to turn to water.

'You can't do that!' he cried out in a high cracked voice. 'You couldn't,
you couldn't! It's impossible.'

'Do you remember,' said O'Brien, 'the moment of panic that used to occur
in your dreams? There was a wall of blackness in front of you, and a
roaring sound in your ears. There was something terrible on the other side
of the wall. You knew that you knew what it was, but you dared not drag it
into the open. It was the rats that were on the other side of the wall.'

'O'Brien!' said Winston, making an effort to control his voice. 'You know
this is not necessary. What is it that you want me to do?'

O'Brien made no direct answer. When he spoke it was in the schoolmasterish
manner that he sometimes affected. He looked thoughtfully into the
distance, as though he were addressing an audience somewhere behind
Winston's back.

'By itself,' he said, 'pain is not always enough. There are occasions when
a human being will stand out against pain, even to the point of death.
But for everyone there is something unendurable--something that cannot be
contemplated. Courage and cowardice are not involved. If you are falling
from a height it is not cowardly to clutch at a rope. If you have come up
from deep water it is not cowardly to fill your lungs with air. It is
merely an instinct which cannot be destroyed. It is the same with the
rats. For you, they are unendurable. They are a form of pressure that you
cannot withstand, even if you wished to. You will do what is required of
you.'

'But what is it, what is it? How can I do it if I don't know what it is?'

O'Brien picked up the cage and brought it across to the nearer table.
He set it down carefully on the baize cloth. Winston could hear the blood
singing in his ears. He had the feeling of sitting in utter loneliness.
He was in the middle of a great empty plain, a flat desert drenched with
sunlight, across which all sounds came to him out of immense distances.
Yet the cage with the rats was not two metres away from him. They were
enormous rats. They were at the age when a rat's muzzle grows blunt and
fierce and his fur brown instead of grey.

'The rat,' said O'Brien, still addressing his invisible audience,
'although a rodent, is carnivorous. You are aware of that. You will have
heard of the things that happen in the poor quarters of this town. In some
streets a woman dare not leave her baby alone in the house, even for five
minutes. The rats are certain to attack it. Within quite a small time they
will strip it to the bones. They also attack sick or dying people. They
show astonishing intelligence in knowing when a human being is helpless.'

There was an outburst of squeals from the cage. It seemed to reach Winston
from far away. The rats were fighting; they were trying to get at each
other through the partition. He heard also a deep groan of despair.
That, too, seemed to come from outside himself.

O'Brien picked up the cage, and, as he did so, pressed something in it.
There was a sharp click. Winston made a frantic effort to tear himself
loose from the chair. It was hopeless; every part of him, even his head,
was held immovably. O'Brien moved the cage nearer. It was less than a
metre from Winston's face.

'I have pressed the first lever,' said O'Brien. 'You understand the
construction of this cage. The mask will fit over your head, leaving no
exit. When I press this other lever, the door of the cage will slide up.
These starving brutes will shoot out of it like bullets. Have you ever
seen a rat leap through the air? They will leap on to your face and bore
straight into it. Sometimes they attack the eyes first. Sometimes they
burrow through the cheeks and devour the tongue.'

The cage was nearer; it was closing in. Winston heard a succession of
shrill cries which appeared to be occurring in the air above his head. But
he fought furiously against his panic. To think, to think, even with a
split second left--to think was the only hope. Suddenly the foul musty
odour of the brutes struck his nostrils. There was a violent convulsion of
nausea inside him, and he almost lost consciousness. Everything had gone
black. For an instant he was insane, a screaming animal. Yet he came out
of the blackness clutching an idea. There was one and only one way to save
himself. He must interpose another human being, the BODY of another human
being, between himself and the rats.

The circle of the mask was large enough now to shut out the vision of
anything else. The wire door was a couple of hand-spans from his face. The
rats knew what was coming now. One of them was leaping up and down, the
other, an old scaly grandfather of the sewers, stood up, with his pink
hands against the bars, and fiercely sniffed the air. Winston could see
the whiskers and the yellow teeth. Again the black panic took hold of him.
He was blind, helpless, mindless.

'It was a common punishment in Imperial China,' said O'Brien as
didactically as ever.

The mask was closing on his face. The wire brushed his cheek. And then--no,
it was not relief, only hope, a tiny fragment of hope. Too late, perhaps
too late. But he had suddenly understood that in the whole world there was
just ONE person to whom he could transfer his punishment--ONE body that he
could thrust between himself and the rats. And he was shouting frantically,
over and over.

'Do it to Julia! Do it to Julia! Not me! Julia! I don't care what you do
to her. Tear her face off, strip her to the bones. Not me! Julia! Not me!'

He was falling backwards, into enormous depths, away from the rats. He was
still strapped in the chair, but he had fallen through the floor, through
the walls of the building, through the earth, through the oceans, through
the atmosphere, into outer space, into the gulfs between the stars--always
away, away, away from the rats. He was light years distant, but O'Brien
was still standing at his side. There was still the cold touch of wire
against his cheek. But through the darkness that enveloped him he heard
another metallic click, and knew that the cage door had clicked shut and
not open.




Chapter 6



The Chestnut Tree was almost empty. A ray of sunlight slanting through a
window fell on dusty table-tops. It was the lonely hour of fifteen. A
tinny music trickled from the telescreens.

Winston sat in his usual corner, gazing into an empty glass. Now and again
he glanced up at a vast face which eyed him from the opposite wall.
BIG BROTHER IS WATCHING YOU, the caption said. Unbidden, a waiter came and
filled his glass up with Victory Gin, shaking into it a few drops from
another bottle with a quill through the cork. It was saccharine flavoured
with cloves, the speciality of the cafe.

Winston was listening to the telescreen. At present only music was coming
out of it, but there was a possibility that at any moment there might be
a special bulletin from the Ministry of Peace. The news from the African
front was disquieting in the extreme. On and off he had been worrying
about it all day. A Eurasian army (Oceania was at war with Eurasia:
Oceania had always been at war with Eurasia) was moving southward at
terrifying speed. The mid-day bulletin had not mentioned any definite
area, but it was probable that already the mouth of the Congo was a
battlefield. Brazzaville and Leopoldville were in danger. One did not have
to look at the map to see what it meant. It was not merely a question of
losing Central Africa: for the first time in the whole war, the territory
of Oceania itself was menaced.

A violent emotion, not fear exactly but a sort of undifferentiated
excitement, flared up in him, then faded again. He stopped thinking about
the war. In these days he could never fix his mind on any one subject for
more than a few moments at a time. He picked up his glass and drained it
at a gulp. As always, the gin made him shudder and even retch slightly.
The stuff was horrible. The cloves and saccharine, themselves disgusting
enough in their sickly way, could not disguise the flat oily smell; and
what was worst of all was that the smell of gin, which dwelt with him
night and day, was inextricably mixed up in his mind with the smell of
those----

He never named them, even in his thoughts, and so far as it was possible
he never visualized them. They were something that he was half-aware of,
hovering close to his face, a smell that clung to his nostrils. As the gin
rose in him he belched through purple lips. He had grown fatter since they
released him, and had regained his old colour--indeed, more than regained
it. His features had thickened, the skin on nose and cheekbones was
coarsely red, even the bald scalp was too deep a pink. A waiter, again
unbidden, brought the chessboard and the current issue of 'The Times',
with the page turned down at the chess problem. Then, seeing that Winston's
glass was empty, he brought the gin bottle and filled it. There was no
need to give orders. They knew his habits. The chessboard was always
waiting for him, his corner table was always reserved; even when the place
was full he had it to himself, since nobody cared to be seen sitting too
close to him. He never even bothered to count his drinks. At irregular
intervals they presented him with a dirty slip of paper which they said
was the bill, but he had the impression that they always undercharged him.
It would have made no difference if it had been the other way about. He
had always plenty of money nowadays. He even had a job, a sinecure, more
highly-paid than his old job had been.

The music from the telescreen stopped and a voice took over. Winston raised
his head to listen. No bulletins from the front, however. It was merely a
brief announcement from the Ministry of Plenty. In the preceding quarter,
it appeared, the Tenth Three-Year Plan's quota for bootlaces had been
overfulfilled by 98 per cent.

He examined the chess problem and set out the pieces. It was a tricky
ending, involving a couple of knights. 'White to play and mate in two
moves.' Winston looked up at the portrait of Big Brother. White always
mates, he thought with a sort of cloudy mysticism. Always, without
exception, it is so arranged. In no chess problem since the beginning of
the world has black ever won. Did it not symbolize the eternal, unvarying
triumph of Good over Evil? The huge face gazed back at him, full of calm
power. White always mates.

The voice from the telescreen paused and added in a different and much
graver tone: 'You are warned to stand by for an important announcement at
fifteen-thirty. Fifteen-thirty! This is news of the highest importance.
Take care not to miss it. Fifteen-thirty!' The tinkling music struck up
again.

Winston's heart stirred. That was the bulletin from the front; instinct
told him that it was bad news that was coming. All day, with little spurts
of excitement, the thought of a smashing defeat in Africa had been in and
out of his mind. He seemed actually to see the Eurasian army swarming
across the never-broken frontier and pouring down into the tip of Africa
like a column of ants. Why had it not been possible to outflank them in
some way? The outline of the West African coast stood out vividly in his
mind. He picked up the white knight and moved it across the board. THERE
was the proper spot. Even while he saw the black horde racing southward he
saw another force, mysteriously assembled, suddenly planted in their rear,
cutting their communications by land and sea. He felt that by willing it he
was bringing that other force into existence. But it was necessary to act
quickly. If they could get control of the whole of Africa, if they had
airfields and submarine bases at the Cape, it would cut Oceania in two. It
might mean anything: defeat, breakdown, the redivision of the world, the
destruction of the Party! He drew a deep breath. An extraordinary medley
of feeling--but it was not a medley, exactly; rather it was successive
layers of feeling, in which one could not say which layer was
undermost--struggled inside him.

The spasm passed. He put the white knight back in its place, but for the
moment he could not settle down to serious study of the chess problem.
His thoughts wandered again. Almost unconsciously he traced with his
finger in the dust on the table:

2+2=5

'They can't get inside you,' she had said. But they could get inside you.
'What happens to you here is FOR EVER,' O'Brien had said. That was a true
word. There were things, your own acts, from which you could never recover.
Something was killed in your breast: burnt out, cauterized out.

He had seen her; he had even spoken to her. There was no danger in it. He
knew as though instinctively that they now took almost no interest in his
doings. He could have arranged to meet her a second time if either of them
had wanted to. Actually it was by chance that they had met. It was in the
Park, on a vile, biting day in March, when the earth was like iron and
all the grass seemed dead and there was not a bud anywhere except a few
crocuses which had pushed themselves up to be dismembered by the wind. He
was hurrying along with frozen hands and watering eyes when he saw her not
ten metres away from him. It struck him at once that she had changed in
some ill-defined way. They almost passed one another without a sign, then
he turned and followed her, not very eagerly. He knew that there was no
danger, nobody would take any interest in him. She did not speak. She
walked obliquely away across the grass as though trying to get rid of him,
then seemed to resign herself to having him at her side. Presently they
were in among a clump of ragged leafless shrubs, useless either for
concealment or as protection from the wind. They halted. It was vilely
cold. The wind whistled through the twigs and fretted the occasional,
dirty-looking crocuses. He put his arm round her waist.

There was no telescreen, but there must be hidden microphones: besides,
they could be seen. It did not matter, nothing mattered. They could have
lain down on the ground and done THAT if they had wanted to. His flesh
froze with horror at the thought of it. She made no response whatever to
the clasp of his arm; she did not even try to disengage herself. He knew
now what had changed in her. Her face was sallower, and there was a long
scar, partly hidden by the hair, across her forehead and temple; but that
was not the change. It was that her waist had grown thicker, and, in a
surprising way, had stiffened. He remembered how once, after the explosion
of a rocket bomb, he had helped to drag a corpse out of some ruins, and
had been astonished not only by the incredible weight of the thing, but by
its rigidity and awkwardness to handle, which made it seem more like stone
than flesh. Her body felt like that. It occurred to him that the texture
of her skin would be quite different from what it had once been.

He did not attempt to kiss her, nor did they speak. As they walked back
across the grass, she looked directly at him for the first time. It
was only a momentary glance, full of contempt and dislike. He wondered
whether it was a dislike that came purely out of the past or whether it
was inspired also by his bloated face and the water that the wind kept
squeezing from his eyes. They sat down on two iron chairs, side by side
but not too close together. He saw that she was about to speak. She moved
her clumsy shoe a few centimetres and deliberately crushed a twig. Her
feet seemed to have grown broader, he noticed.

'I betrayed you,' she said baldly.

'I betrayed you,' he said.

She gave him another quick look of dislike.

'Sometimes,' she said, 'they threaten you with something something you
can't stand up to, can't even think about. And then you say, "Don't do it
to me, do it to somebody else, do it to so-and-so." And perhaps you might
pretend, afterwards, that it was only a trick and that you just said it to
make them stop and didn't really mean it. But that isn't true. At the time
when it happens you do mean it. You think there's no other way of saving
yourself, and you're quite ready to save yourself that way. You WANT it to
happen to the other person. You don't give a damn what they suffer. All
you care about is yourself.'

'All you care about is yourself,' he echoed.

'And after that, you don't feel the same towards the other person any
longer.'

'No,' he said, 'you don't feel the same.'

There did not seem to be anything more to say. The wind plastered their
thin overalls against their bodies. Almost at once it became embarrassing
to sit there in silence: besides, it was too cold to keep still. She said
something about catching her Tube and stood up to go.

'We must meet again,' he said.

'Yes,' she said, 'we must meet again.'

He followed irresolutely for a little distance, half a pace behind her.
They did not speak again. She did not actually try to shake him off, but
walked at just such a speed as to prevent his keeping abreast of her.
He had made up his mind that he would accompany her as far as the Tube
station, but suddenly this process of trailing along in the cold seemed
pointless and unbearable. He was overwhelmed by a desire not so much to
get away from Julia as to get back to the Chestnut Tree Cafe, which had
never seemed so attractive as at this moment. He had a nostalgic vision
of his corner table, with the newspaper and the chessboard and the
ever-flowing gin. Above all, it would be warm in there. The next moment,
not altogether by accident, he allowed himself to become separated from
her by a small knot of people. He made a half-hearted attempt to catch up,
then slowed down, turned, and made off in the opposite direction. When he
had gone fifty metres he looked back. The street was not crowded, but
already he could not distinguish her. Any one of a dozen hurrying figures
might have been hers. Perhaps her thickened, stiffened body was no longer
recognizable from behind.

'At the time when it happens,' she had said, 'you do mean it.' He had
meant it. He had not merely said it, he had wished it. He had wished that
she and not he should be delivered over to the----

Something changed in the music that trickled from the telescreen. A
cracked and jeering note, a yellow note, came into it. And then--perhaps
it was not happening, perhaps it was only a memory taking on the semblance
of sound--a voice was singing:


  'Under the spreading chestnut tree
  I sold you and you sold me----'


The tears welled up in his eyes. A passing waiter noticed that his glass
was empty and came back with the gin bottle.

He took up his glass and sniffed at it. The stuff grew not less but more
horrible with every mouthful he drank. But it had become the element he
swam in. It was his life, his death, and his resurrection. It was gin that
sank him into stupor every night, and gin that revived him every morning.
When he woke, seldom before eleven hundred, with gummed-up eyelids and
fiery mouth and a back that seemed to be broken, it would have been
impossible even to rise from the horizontal if it had not been for the
bottle and teacup placed beside the bed overnight. Through the midday
hours he sat with glazed face, the bottle handy, listening to the
telescreen. From fifteen to closing-time he was a fixture in the Chestnut
Tree. No one cared what he did any longer, no whistle woke him, no
telescreen admonished him. Occasionally, perhaps twice a week, he went
to a dusty, forgotten-looking office in the Ministry of Truth and did
a little work, or what was called work. He had been appointed to a
sub-committee of a sub-committee which had sprouted from one of the
innumerable committees dealing with minor difficulties that arose in the
compilation of the Eleventh Edition of the Newspeak Dictionary. They were
engaged in producing something called an Interim Report, but what it was
that they were reporting on he had never definitely found out. It was
something to do with the question of whether commas should be placed
inside brackets, or outside. There were four others on the committee, all
of them persons similar to himself. There were days when they assembled
and then promptly dispersed again, frankly admitting to one another that
there was not really anything to be done. But there were other days when
they settled down to their work almost eagerly, making a tremendous show
of entering up their minutes and drafting long memoranda which were never
finished--when the argument as to what they were supposedly arguing about
grew extraordinarily involved and abstruse, with subtle haggling over
definitions, enormous digressions, quarrels--threats, even, to appeal to
higher authority. And then suddenly the life would go out of them and
they would sit round the table looking at one another with extinct eyes,
like ghosts fading at cock-crow.

The telescreen was silent for a moment. Winston raised his head again. The
bulletin! But no, they were merely changing the music. He had the map of
Africa behind his eyelids. The movement of the armies was a diagram: a
black arrow tearing vertically southward, and a white arrow horizontally
eastward, across the tail of the first. As though for reassurance he
looked up at the imperturbable face in the portrait. Was it conceivable
that the second arrow did not even exist?

His interest flagged again. He drank another mouthful of gin, picked up
the white knight and made a tentative move. Check. But it was evidently
not the right move, because----

Uncalled, a memory floated into his mind. He saw a candle-lit room with a
vast white-counterpaned bed, and himself, a boy of nine or ten, sitting on
the floor, shaking a dice-box, and laughing excitedly. His mother was
sitting opposite him and also laughing.

It must have been about a month before she disappeared. It was a moment of
reconciliation, when the nagging hunger in his belly was forgotten and his
earlier affection for her had temporarily revived. He remembered the day
well, a pelting, drenching day when the water streamed down the window-pane
and the light indoors was too dull to read by. The boredom of the two
children in the dark, cramped bedroom became unbearable. Winston whined
and grizzled, made futile demands for food, fretted about the room pulling
everything out of place and kicking the wainscoting until the neighbours
banged on the wall, while the younger child wailed intermittently. In the
end his mother said, 'Now be good, and I'll buy you a toy. A lovely
toy--you'll love it'; and then she had gone out in the rain, to a little
general shop which was still sporadically open nearby, and came back with
a cardboard box containing an outfit of Snakes and Ladders. He could still
remember the smell of the damp cardboard. It was a miserable outfit. The
board was cracked and the tiny wooden dice were so ill-cut that they
would hardly lie on their sides. Winston looked at the thing sulkily and
without interest. But then his mother lit a piece of candle and they sat
down on the floor to play. Soon he was wildly excited and shouting with
laughter as the tiddly-winks climbed hopefully up the ladders and then
came slithering down the snakes again, almost to the starting-point. They
played eight games, winning four each. His tiny sister, too young to
understand what the game was about, had sat propped up against a bolster,
laughing because the others were laughing. For a whole afternoon they had
all been happy together, as in his earlier childhood.

He pushed the picture out of his mind. It was a false memory. He was
troubled by false memories occasionally. They did not matter so long as
one knew them for what they were. Some things had happened, others had not
happened. He turned back to the chessboard and picked up the white knight
again. Almost in the same instant it dropped on to the board with a
clatter. He had started as though a pin had run into him.

A shrill trumpet-call had pierced the air. It was the bulletin! Victory!
It always meant victory when a trumpet-call preceded the news. A sort of
electric drill ran through the cafe. Even the waiters had started and
pricked up their ears.

The trumpet-call had let loose an enormous volume of noise. Already an
excited voice was gabbling from the telescreen, but even as it started
it was almost drowned by a roar of cheering from outside. The news had
run round the streets like magic. He could hear just enough of what was
issuing from the telescreen to realize that it had all happened, as he had
foreseen; a vast seaborne armada had secretly assembled a sudden blow in
the enemy's rear, the white arrow tearing across the tail of the black.
Fragments of triumphant phrases pushed themselves through the din: 'Vast
strategic manoeuvre--perfect co-ordination--utter rout--half a million
prisoners--complete demoralization--control of the whole of Africa--bring
the war within measurable distance of its end--victory--greatest victory
in human history--victory, victory, victory!'

Under the table Winston's feet made convulsive movements. He had not
stirred from his seat, but in his mind he was running, swiftly running,
he was with the crowds outside, cheering himself deaf. He looked up again
at the portrait of Big Brother. The colossus that bestrode the world!
The rock against which the hordes of Asia dashed themselves in vain! He
thought how ten minutes ago--yes, only ten minutes--there had still been
equivocation in his heart as he wondered whether the news from the front
would be of victory or defeat. Ah, it was more than a Eurasian army that
had perished! Much had changed in him since that first day in the Ministry
of Love, but the final, indispensable, healing change had never happened,
until this moment.

The voice from the telescreen was still pouring forth its tale of prisoners
and booty and slaughter, but the shouting outside had died down a little.
The waiters were turning back to their work. One of them approached with
the gin bottle. Winston, sitting in a blissful dream, paid no attention
as his glass was filled up. He was not running or cheering any longer. He
was back in the Ministry of Love, with everything forgiven, his soul white
as snow. He was in the public dock, confessing everything, implicating
everybody. He was walking down the white-tiled corridor, with the feeling
of walking in sunlight, and an armed guard at his back. The long-hoped-for
bullet was entering his brain.

He gazed up at the enormous face. Forty years it had taken him to learn
what kind of smile was hidden beneath the dark moustache. O cruel, needless
misunderstanding! O stubborn, self-willed exile from the loving breast!
Two gin-scented tears trickled down the sides of his nose. But it was all
right, everything was all right, the struggle was finished. He had won
the victory over himself. He loved Big Brother.



THE END



APPENDIX.

The Principles of Newspeak



Newspeak was the official language of Oceania and had been devised to meet
the ideological needs of Ingsoc, or English Socialism. In the year 1984
there was not as yet anyone who used Newspeak as his sole means of
communication, either in speech or writing. The leading articles in
'The Times' were written in it, but this was a TOUR DE FORCE which could
only be carried out by a specialist. It was expected that Newspeak would
have finally superseded Oldspeak (or Standard English, as we should
call it) by about the year 2050. Meanwhile it gained ground steadily, all
Party members tending to use Newspeak words and grammatical constructions
more and more in their everyday speech. The version in use in 1984, and
embodied in the Ninth and Tenth Editions of the Newspeak Dictionary, was
a provisional one, and contained many superfluous words and archaic
formations which were due to be suppressed later. It is with the final,
perfected version, as embodied in the Eleventh Edition of the Dictionary,
that we are concerned here.

The purpose of Newspeak was not only to provide a medium of expression
for the world-view and mental habits proper to the devotees of Ingsoc,
but to make all other modes of thought impossible. It was intended that
when Newspeak had been adopted once and for all and Oldspeak forgotten,
a heretical thought--that is, a thought diverging from the principles of
Ingsoc--should be literally unthinkable, at least so far as thought is
dependent on words. Its vocabulary was so constructed as to give exact and
often very subtle expression to every meaning that a Party member could
properly wish to express, while excluding all other meanings and also the
possibility of arriving at them by indirect methods. This was done partly
by the invention of new words, but chiefly by eliminating undesirable
words and by stripping such words as remained of unorthodox meanings, and
so far as possible of all secondary meanings whatever. To give a single
example. The word FREE still existed in Newspeak, but it could only be
used in such statements as 'This dog is free from lice' or 'This field is
free from weeds'. It could not be used in its old sense of 'politically
free' or 'intellectually free' since political and intellectual freedom no
longer existed even as concepts, and were therefore of necessity nameless.
Quite apart from the suppression of definitely heretical words, reduction
of vocabulary was regarded as an end in itself, and no word that could be
dispensed with was allowed to survive. Newspeak was designed not to extend
but to DIMINISH the range of thought, and this purpose was indirectly
assisted by cutting the choice of words down to a minimum.

Newspeak was founded on the English language as we now know it, though
many Newspeak sentences, even when not containing newly-created words,
would be barely intelligible to an English-speaker of our own day. Newspeak
words were divided into three distinct classes, known as the A vocabulary,
the B vocabulary (also called compound words), and the C vocabulary.
It will be simpler to discuss each class separately, but the grammatical
peculiarities of the language can be dealt with in the section devoted to
the A vocabulary, since the same rules held good for all three categories.


THE A VOCABULARY. The A vocabulary consisted of the words needed for the
business of everyday life--for such things as eating, drinking, working,
putting on one's clothes, going up and down stairs, riding in vehicles,
gardening, cooking, and the like. It was composed almost entirely of words
that we already possess words like HIT, RUN, DOG, TREE, SUGAR, HOUSE,
FIELD--but in comparison with the present-day English vocabulary their
number was extremely small, while their meanings were far more rigidly
defined. All ambiguities and shades of meaning had been purged out of
them. So far as it could be achieved, a Newspeak word of this class was
simply a staccato sound expressing ONE clearly understood concept. It
would have been quite impossible to use the A vocabulary for literary
purposes or for political or philosophical discussion. It was intended
only to express simple, purposive thoughts, usually involving concrete
objects or physical actions.

The grammar of Newspeak had two outstanding peculiarities. The first of
these was an almost complete interchangeability between different parts of
speech. Any word in the language (in principle this applied even to very
abstract words such as IF or WHEN) could be used either as verb, noun,
adjective, or adverb. Between the verb and the noun form, when they were
of the same root, there was never any variation, this rule of itself
involving the destruction of many archaic forms. The word THOUGHT, for
example, did not exist in Newspeak. Its place was taken by THINK, which
did duty for both noun and verb. No etymological principle was followed
here: in some cases it was the original noun that was chosen for retention,
in other cases the verb. Even where a noun and verb of kindred meaning
were not etymologically connected, one or other of them was frequently
suppressed. There was, for example, no such word as CUT, its meaning being
sufficiently covered by the noun-verb KNIFE. Adjectives were formed by
adding the suffix -FUL to the noun-verb, and adverbs by adding -WISE. Thus
for example, SPEEDFUL meant 'rapid' and SPEEDWISE meant 'quickly'. Certain
of our present-day adjectives, such as GOOD, STRONG, BIG, BLACK, SOFT,
were retained, but their total number was very small. There was little
need for them, since almost any adjectival meaning could be arrived at by
adding -FUL to a noun-verb. None of the now-existing adverbs was retained,
except for a very few already ending in -WISE: the -WISE termination was
invariable. The word WELL, for example, was replaced by GOODWISE.

In addition, any word--this again applied in principle to every word in
the language--could be negatived by adding the affix UN-, or could be
strengthened by the affix PLUS-, or, for still greater emphasis,
DOUBLEPLUS-. Thus, for example, UNCOLD meant 'warm', while PLUSCOLD and
DOUBLEPLUSCOLD meant, respectively, 'very cold' and 'superlatively cold'.
It was also possible, as in present-day English, to modify the meaning of
almost any word by prepositional affixes such as ANTE-, POST-, UP-, DOWN-,
etc. By such methods it was found possible to bring about an enormous
diminution of vocabulary. Given, for instance, the word GOOD, there was no
need for such a word as BAD, since the required meaning was equally
well--indeed, better--expressed by UNGOOD. All that was necessary, in any
case where two words formed a natural pair of opposites, was to decide
which of them to suppress. DARK, for example, could be replaced by UNLIGHT,
or LIGHT by UNDARK, according to preference.

The second distinguishing mark of Newspeak grammar was its regularity.
Subject to a few exceptions which are mentioned below all inflexions
followed the same rules. Thus, in all verbs the preterite and the past
participle were the same and ended in -ED. The preterite of STEAL was
STEALED, the preterite of THINK was THINKED, and so on throughout the
language, all such forms as SWAM, GAVE, BROUGHT, SPOKE, TAKEN, etc., being
abolished. All plurals were made by adding -S or -ES as the case might be.
The plurals OF MAN, OX, LIFE, were MANS, OXES, LIFES. Comparison of
adjectives was invariably made by adding -ER, -EST (GOOD, GOODER, GOODEST),
irregular forms and the MORE, MOST formation being suppressed.

The only classes of words that were still allowed to inflect irregularly
were the pronouns, the relatives, the demonstrative adjectives, and the
auxiliary verbs. All of these followed their ancient usage, except that
WHOM had been scrapped as unnecessary, and the SHALL, SHOULD tenses had
been dropped, all their uses being covered by WILL and WOULD. There were
also certain irregularities in word-formation arising out of the need for
rapid and easy speech. A word which was difficult to utter, or was liable
to be incorrectly heard, was held to be ipso facto a bad word; occasionally
therefore, for the sake of euphony, extra letters were inserted into a word
or an archaic formation was retained. But this need made itself felt
chiefly in connexion with the B vocabulary. WHY so great an importance was
attached to ease of pronunciation will be made clear later in this essay.


THE B VOCABULARY. The B vocabulary consisted of words which had been
deliberately constructed for political purposes: words, that is to say,
which not only had in every case a political implication, but were intended
to impose a desirable mental attitude upon the person using them. Without
a full understanding of the principles of Ingsoc it was difficult to use
these words correctly. In some cases they could be translated into
Oldspeak, or even into words taken from the A vocabulary, but this usually
demanded a long paraphrase and always involved the loss of certain
overtones. The B words were a sort of verbal shorthand, often packing
whole ranges of ideas into a few syllables, and at the same time more
accurate and forcible than ordinary language.

The B words were in all cases compound words. [Compound words such as
SPEAKWRITE, were of course to be found in the A vocabulary, but these were
merely convenient abbreviations and had no special ideological colour.]
They consisted of two or more words, or portions of words, welded together
in an easily pronounceable form. The resulting amalgam was always a
noun-verb, and inflected according to the ordinary rules. To take a single
example: the word GOODTHINK, meaning, very roughly, 'orthodoxy', or, if
one chose to regard it as a verb, 'to think in an orthodox manner'. This
inflected as follows: noun-verb, GOODTHINK; past tense and past participle,
GOODTHINKED; present participle, GOOD-THINKING; adjective, GOODTHINKFUL;
adverb, GOODTHINKWISE; verbal noun, GOODTHINKER.

The B words were not constructed on any etymological plan. The words of
which they were made up could be any parts of speech, and could be placed
in any order and mutilated in any way which made them easy to pronounce
while indicating their derivation. In the word CRIMETHINK (thoughtcrime),
for instance, the THINK came second, whereas in THINKPOL (Thought Police)
it came first, and in the latter word POLICE had lost its second syllable.
Because of the great difficulty in securing euphony, irregular formations
were commoner in the B vocabulary than in the A vocabulary. For example,
the adjective forms of MINITRUE, MINIPAX, and MINILUV were, respectively,
MINITRUTHFUL, MINIPEACEFUL, and MINILOVELY, simply because -TRUEFUL,
-PAXFUL, and -LOVEFUL were slightly awkward to pronounce. In principle,
however, all B words could inflect, and all inflected in exactly the
same way.

Some of the B words had highly subtilized meanings, barely intelligible to
anyone who had not mastered the language as a whole. Consider, for example,
such a typical sentence from a 'Times' leading article as OLDTHINKERS
UNBELLYFEEL INGSOC. The shortest rendering that one could make of this
in Oldspeak would be: 'Those whose ideas were formed before the Revolution
cannot have a full emotional understanding of the principles of English
Socialism.' But this is not an adequate translation. To begin with, in
order to grasp the full meaning of the Newspeak sentence quoted above,
one would have to have a clear idea of what is meant by INGSOC. And in
addition, only a person thoroughly grounded in Ingsoc could appreciate
the full force of the word BELLYFEEL, which implied a blind, enthusiastic
acceptance difficult to imagine today; or of the word OLDTHINK, which was
inextricably mixed up with the idea of wickedness and decadence. But the
special function of certain Newspeak words, of which OLDTHINK was one,
was not so much to express meanings as to destroy them. These words,
necessarily few in number, had had their meanings extended until they
contained within themselves whole batteries of words which, as they were
sufficiently covered by a single comprehensive term, could now be scrapped
and forgotten. The greatest difficulty facing the compilers of the Newspeak
Dictionary was not to invent new words, but, having invented them, to make
sure what they meant: to make sure, that is to say, what ranges of words
they cancelled by their existence.

As we have already seen in the case of the word FREE, words which had
once borne a heretical meaning were sometimes retained for the sake of
convenience, but only with the undesirable meanings purged out of them.
Countless other words such as HONOUR, JUSTICE, MORALITY, INTERNATIONALISM,
DEMOCRACY, SCIENCE, and RELIGION had simply ceased to exist. A few blanket
words covered them, and, in covering them, abolished them. All words
grouping themselves round the concepts of liberty and equality, for
instance, were contained in the single word CRIMETHINK, while all words
grouping themselves round the concepts of objectivity and rationalism
were contained in the single word OLDTHINK. Greater precision would have
been dangerous. What was required in a Party member was an outlook similar
to that of the ancient Hebrew who knew, without knowing much else, that
all nations other than his own worshipped 'false gods'. He did not need to
know that these gods were called Baal, Osiris, Moloch, Ashtaroth, and the
like: probably the less he knew about them the better for his orthodoxy.
He knew Jehovah and the commandments of Jehovah: he knew, therefore, that
all gods with other names or other attributes were false gods. In somewhat
the same way, the party member knew what constituted right conduct, and in
exceedingly vague, generalized terms he knew what kinds of departure from
it were possible. His sexual life, for example, was entirely regulated by
the two Newspeak words SEXCRIME (sexual immorality) and GOODSEX (chastity).
SEXCRIME covered all sexual misdeeds whatever. It covered fornication,
adultery, homosexuality, and other perversions, and, in addition, normal
intercourse practised for its own sake. There was no need to enumerate
them separately, since they were all equally culpable, and, in principle,
all punishable by death. In the C vocabulary, which consisted of scientific
and technical words, it might be necessary to give specialized names to
certain sexual aberrations, but the ordinary citizen had no need of them.
He knew what was meant by GOODSEX--that is to say, normal intercourse
between man and wife, for the sole purpose of begetting children, and
without physical pleasure on the part of the woman: all else was SEXCRIME.
In Newspeak it was seldom possible to follow a heretical thought further
than the perception that it WAS heretical: beyond that point the necessary
words were nonexistent.

No word in the B vocabulary was ideologically neutral. A great many were
euphemisms. Such words, for instance, as JOYCAMP (forced-labour camp) or
MINIPAX (Ministry of Peace, i.e. Ministry of War) meant almost the exact
opposite of what they appeared to mean. Some words, on the other hand,
displayed a frank and contemptuous understanding of the real nature of
Oceanic society. An example was PROLEFEED, meaning the rubbishy
entertainment and spurious news which the Party handed out to the masses.
Other words, again, were ambivalent, having the connotation 'good' when
applied to the Party and 'bad' when applied to its enemies. But in
addition there were great numbers of words which at first sight appeared
to be mere abbreviations and which derived their ideological colour not
from their meaning, but from their structure.

So far as it could be contrived, everything that had or might have
political significance of any kind was fitted into the B vocabulary. The
name of every organization, or body of people, or doctrine, or country, or
institution, or public building, was invariably cut down into the familiar
shape; that is, a single easily pronounced word with the smallest number
of syllables that would preserve the original derivation. In the Ministry
of Truth, for example, the Records Department, in which Winston Smith
worked, was called RECDEP, the Fiction Department was called FICDEP, the
Teleprogrammes Department was called TELEDEP, and so on. This was not
done solely with the object of saving time. Even in the early decades of
the twentieth century, telescoped words and phrases had been one of the
characteristic features of political language; and it had been noticed
that the tendency to use abbreviations of this kind was most marked in
totalitarian countries and totalitarian organizations. Examples were such
words as NAZI, GESTAPO, COMINTERN, INPRECORR, AGITPROP. In the beginning
the practice had been adopted as it were instinctively, but in Newspeak
it was used with a conscious purpose. It was perceived that in thus
abbreviating a name one narrowed and subtly altered its meaning, by
cutting out most of the associations that would otherwise cling to it.
The words COMMUNIST INTERNATIONAL, for instance, call up a composite
picture of universal human brotherhood, red flags, barricades, Karl Marx,
and the Paris Commune. The word COMINTERN, on the other hand, suggests
merely a tightly-knit organization and a well-defined body of doctrine.
It refers to something almost as easily recognized, and as limited in
purpose, as a chair or a table. COMINTERN is a word that can be uttered
almost without taking thought, whereas COMMUNIST INTERNATIONAL is a phrase
over which one is obliged to linger at least momentarily. In the same way,
the associations called up by a word like MINITRUE are fewer and more
controllable than those called up by MINISTRY OF TRUTH. This accounted not
only for the habit of abbreviating whenever possible, but also for the
almost exaggerated care that was taken to make every word easily
pronounceable.

In Newspeak, euphony outweighed every consideration other than exactitude
of meaning. Regularity of grammar was always sacrificed to it when it
seemed necessary. And rightly so, since what was required, above all for
political purposes, was short clipped words of unmistakable meaning which
could be uttered rapidly and which roused the minimum of echoes in the
speaker's mind. The words of the B vocabulary even gained in force from
the fact that nearly all of them were very much alike. Almost invariably
these words--GOODTHINK, MINIPAX, PROLEFEED, SEXCRIME, JOYCAMP, INGSOC,
BELLYFEEL, THINKPOL, and countless others--were words of two or three
syllables, with the stress distributed equally between the first syllable
and the last. The use of them encouraged a gabbling style of speech, at
once staccato and monotonous. And this was exactly what was aimed at. The
intention was to make speech, and especially speech on any subject not
ideologically neutral, as nearly as possible independent of consciousness.
For the purposes of everyday life it was no doubt necessary, or sometimes
necessary, to reflect before speaking, but a Party member called upon to
make a political or ethical judgement should be able to spray forth the
correct opinions as automatically as a machine gun spraying forth bullets.
His training fitted him to do this, the language gave him an almost
foolproof instrument, and the texture of the words, with their harsh sound
and a certain wilful ugliness which was in accord with the spirit of
Ingsoc, assisted the process still further.

So did the fact of having very few words to choose from. Relative to our
own, the Newspeak vocabulary was tiny, and new ways of reducing it were
constantly being devised. Newspeak, indeed, differed from most all other
languages in that its vocabulary grew smaller instead of larger every
year. Each reduction was a gain, since the smaller the area of choice,
the smaller the temptation to take thought. Ultimately it was hoped to
make articulate speech issue from the larynx without involving the higher
brain centres at all. This aim was frankly admitted in the Newspeak word
DUCKSPEAK, meaning 'to quack like a duck'. Like various other words in
the B vocabulary, DUCKSPEAK was ambivalent in meaning. Provided that the
opinions which were quacked out were orthodox ones, it implied nothing but
praise, and when 'The Times' referred to one of the orators of the Party
as a DOUBLEPLUSGOOD DUCKSPEAKER it was paying a warm and valued compliment.


THE C VOCABULARY. The C vocabulary was supplementary to the others and
consisted entirely of scientific and technical terms. These resembled the
scientific terms in use today, and were constructed from the same roots,
but the usual care was taken to define them rigidly and strip them of
undesirable meanings. They followed the same grammatical rules as the
words in the other two vocabularies. Very few of the C words had any
currency either in everyday speech or in political speech. Any scientific
worker or technician could find all the words he needed in the list devoted
to his own speciality, but he seldom had more than a smattering of the
words occurring in the other lists. Only a very few words were common to
all lists, and there was no vocabulary expressing the function of Science
as a habit of mind, or a method of thought, irrespective of its particular
branches. There was, indeed, no word for 'Science', any meaning that it
could possibly bear being already sufficiently covered by the word INGSOC.

From the foregoing account it will be seen that in Newspeak the expression
of unorthodox opinions, above a very low level, was well-nigh impossible.
It was of course possible to utter heresies of a very crude kind, a
species of blasphemy. It would have been possible, for example, to say
BIG BROTHER IS UNGOOD. But this statement, which to an orthodox ear merely
conveyed a self-evident absurdity, could not have been sustained by
reasoned argument, because the necessary words were not available. Ideas
inimical to Ingsoc could only be entertained in a vague wordless form,
and could only be named in very broad terms which lumped together and
condemned whole groups of heresies without defining them in doing so.
One could, in fact, only use Newspeak for unorthodox purposes by
illegitimately translating some of the words back into Oldspeak. For
example, ALL MANS ARE EQUAL was a possible Newspeak sentence, but only
in the same sense in which ALL MEN ARE REDHAIRED is a possible Oldspeak
sentence. It did not contain a grammatical error, but it expressed
a palpable untruth--i.e. that all men are of equal size, weight, or
strength. The concept of political equality no longer existed, and this
secondary meaning had accordingly been purged out of the word EQUAL.
In 1984, when Oldspeak was still the normal means of communication,
the danger theoretically existed that in using Newspeak words one might
remember their original meanings. In practice it was not difficult for
any person well grounded in DOUBLETHINK to avoid doing this, but within
a couple of generations even the possibility of such a lapse would have
vanished. A person growing up with Newspeak as his sole language would no
more know that EQUAL had once had the secondary meaning of 'politically
equal', or that FREE had once meant 'intellectually free', than for
instance, a person who had never heard of chess would be aware of the
secondary meanings attaching to QUEEN and ROOK. There would be many
crimes and errors which it would be beyond his power to commit, simply
because they were nameless and therefore unimaginable. And it was to be
foreseen that with the passage of time the distinguishing characteristics
of Newspeak would become more and more pronounced--its words growing
fewer and fewer, their meanings more and more rigid, and the chance of
putting them to improper uses always diminishing.

When Oldspeak had been once and for all superseded, the last link with
the past would have been severed. History had already been rewritten,
but fragments of the literature of the past survived here and there,
imperfectly censored, and so long as one retained one's knowledge of
Oldspeak it was possible to read them. In the future such fragments, even
if they chanced to survive, would be unintelligible and untranslatable.
It was impossible to translate any passage of Oldspeak into Newspeak unless
it either referred to some technical process or some very simple everyday
action, or was already orthodox (GOODTHINKFUL would be the Newspeak
expression) in tendency. In practice this meant that no book written before
approximately 1960 could be translated as a whole. Pre-revolutionary
literature could only be subjected to ideological translation--that is,
alteration in sense as well as language. Take for example the well-known
passage from the Declaration of Independence:


WE HOLD THESE TRUTHS TO BE SELF-EVIDENT, THAT ALL MEN ARE CREATED EQUAL,
THAT THEY ARE ENDOWED BY THEIR CREATOR WITH CERTAIN INALIENABLE RIGHTS,
THAT AMONG THESE ARE LIFE, LIBERTY, AND THE PURSUIT OF HAPPINESS.
THAT TO SECURE THESE RIGHTS, GOVERNMENTS ARE INSTITUTED AMONG MEN,
DERIVING THEIR POWERS FROM THE CONSENT OF THE GOVERNED. THAT WHENEVER
ANY FORM OF GOVERNMENT BECOMES DESTRUCTIVE OF THOSE ENDS, IT IS THE RIGHT
OF THE PEOPLE TO ALTER OR ABOLISH IT, AND TO INSTITUTE NEW GOVERNMENT...


It would have been quite impossible to render this into Newspeak while
keeping to the sense of the original. The nearest one could come to doing
so would be to swallow the whole passage up in the single word CRIMETHINK.
A full translation could only be an ideological translation, whereby
Jefferson's words would be changed into a panegyric on absolute government.

A good deal of the literature of the past was, indeed, already being
transformed in this way. Considerations of prestige made it desirable to
preserve the memory of certain historical figures, while at the same time
bringing their achievements into line with the philosophy of Ingsoc.
Various writers, such as Shakespeare, Milton, Swift, Byron, Dickens, and
some others were therefore in process of translation: when the task had
been completed, their original writings, with all else that survived of
the literature of the past, would be destroyed. These translations were
a slow and difficult business, and it was not expected that they would
be finished before the first or second decade of the twenty-first
century. There were also large quantities of merely utilitarian
literature--indispensable technical manuals, and the like--that had to
be treated in the same way. It was chiefly in order to allow time for
the preliminary work of translation that the final adoption of Newspeak
had been fixed for so late a date as 2050.



THE END
</article>
<article name="Candide">
CANDIDE

BY VOLTAIRE

INTRODUCTION BY PHILIP LITTELL

BONI AND LIVERIGHT, INC.

PUBLISHERS NEW YORK

Copyright, 1918, by
BONI & LIVERIGHT, INC.

Printed in the United States of America




INTRODUCTION


Ever since 1759, when Voltaire wrote "Candide" in ridicule of the notion
that this is the best of all possible worlds, this world has been a
gayer place for readers. Voltaire wrote it in three days, and five or
six generations have found that its laughter does not grow old.

"Candide" has not aged. Yet how different the book would have looked if
Voltaire had written it a hundred and fifty years later than 1759. It
would have been, among other things, a book of sights and sounds. A
modern writer would have tried to catch and fix in words some of those
Atlantic changes which broke the Atlantic monotony of that voyage from
Cadiz to Buenos Ayres. When Martin and Candide were sailing the length
of the Mediterranean we should have had a contrast between naked scarped
Balearic cliffs and headlands of Calabria in their mists. We should have
had quarter distances, far horizons, the altering silhouettes of an
Ionian island. Colored birds would have filled Paraguay with their
silver or acid cries.

Dr. Pangloss, to prove the existence of design in the universe, says
that noses were made to carry spectacles, and so we have spectacles. A
modern satirist would not try to paint with Voltaire's quick brush the
doctrine that he wanted to expose. And he would choose a more
complicated doctrine than Dr. Pangloss's optimism, would study it more
closely, feel his destructive way about it with a more learned and
caressing malice. His attack, stealthier, more flexible and more patient
than Voltaire's, would call upon us, especially when his learning got a
little out of control, to be more than patient. Now and then he would
bore us. "Candide" never bored anybody except William Wordsworth.

Voltaire's men and women point his case against optimism by starting
high and falling low. A modern could not go about it after this fashion.
He would not plunge his people into an unfamiliar misery. He would just
keep them in the misery they were born to.

But such an account of Voltaire's procedure is as misleading as the
plaster cast of a dance. Look at his procedure again. Mademoiselle
Cungonde, the illustrious Westphalian, sprung from a family that could
prove seventy-one quarterings, descends and descends until we find her
earning her keep by washing dishes in the Propontis. The aged faithful
attendant, victim of a hundred acts of rape by negro pirates, remembers
that she is the daughter of a pope, and that in honor of her
approaching marriage with a Prince of Massa-Carrara all Italy wrote
sonnets of which not one was passable. We do not need to know French
literature before Voltaire in order to feel, although the lurking parody
may escape us, that he is poking fun at us and at himself. His laughter
at his own methods grows more unmistakable at the last, when he
caricatures them by casually assembling six fallen monarchs in an inn at
Venice.

A modern assailant of optimism would arm himself with social pity. There
is no social pity in "Candide." Voltaire, whose light touch on familiar
institutions opens them and reveals their absurdity, likes to remind us
that the slaughter and pillage and murder which Candide witnessed among
the Bulgarians was perfectly regular, having been conducted according to
the laws and usages of war. Had Voltaire lived to-day he would have done
to poverty what he did to war. Pitying the poor, he would have shown us
poverty as a ridiculous anachronism, and both the ridicule and the pity
would have expressed his indignation.

Almost any modern, essaying a philosophic tale, would make it long.
"Candide" is only a "Hamlet" and a half long. It would hardly have been
shorter if Voltaire had spent three months on it, instead of those three
days. A conciseness to be matched in English by nobody except Pope, who
can say a plagiarizing enemy "steals much, spends little, and has
nothing left," a conciseness which Pope toiled and sweated for, came as
easy as wit to Voltaire. He can afford to be witty, parenthetically, by
the way, prodigally, without saving, because he knows there is more wit
where that came from.

One of Max Beerbohm's cartoons shows us the young Twentieth Century
going at top speed, and watched by two of his predecessors. Underneath
is this legend: "The Grave Misgivings of the Nineteenth Century, and the
Wicked Amusement of the Eighteenth, in Watching the Progress (or
whatever it is) of the Twentieth." This Eighteenth Century snuff-taking
and malicious, is like Voltaire, who nevertheless must know, if he
happens to think of it, that not yet in the Twentieth Century, not for
all its speed mania, has any one come near to equalling the speed of a
prose tale by Voltaire. "Candide" is a full book. It is filled with
mockery, with inventiveness, with things as concrete as things to eat
and coins, it has time for the neatest intellectual clickings, it is
never hurried, and it moves with the most amazing rapidity. It has the
rapidity of high spirits playing a game. The dry high spirits of this
destroyer of optimism make most optimists look damp and depressed.
Contemplation of the stupidity which deems happiness possible almost
made Voltaire happy. His attack on optimism is one of the gayest books
in the world. Gaiety has been scattered everywhere up and down its pages
by Voltaire's lavish hand, by his thin fingers.

Many propagandist satirical books have been written with "Candide" in
mind, but not too many. To-day, especially, when new faiths are changing
the structure of the world, faiths which are still plastic enough to be
deformed by every disciple, each disciple for himself, and which have
not yet received the final deformation known as universal acceptance,
to-day "Candide" is an inspiration to every narrative satirist who hates
one of these new faiths, or hates every interpretation of it but his
own. Either hatred will serve as a motive to satire.

That is why the present is one of the right moments to republish
"Candide." I hope it will inspire younger men and women, the only ones
who can be inspired, to have a try at Theodore, or Militarism; Jane, or
Pacifism; at So-and-So, the Pragmatist or the Freudian. And I hope, too,
that they will without trying hold their pens with an eighteenth century
lightness, not inappropriate to a philosophic tale. In Voltaire's
fingers, as Anatole France has said, the pen runs and laughs. PHILIP
LITTELL.




CONTENTS

CHAPTER                                                       PAGE

     I. How Candide was brought up in a
        Magnificent Castle, and how he was
        expelled thence                                          1

    II. What became of Candide among the
        Bulgarians                                               5

   III. How Candide made his escape from the
        Bulgarians, and what afterwards became
        of him                                                   9

    IV. How Candide found his old Master
        Pangloss, and what happened to them                     13

     V. Tempest, Shipwreck, Earthquake, and
        what became of Doctor Pangloss,
        Candide, and James the Anabaptist                       18

    VI. How the Portuguese made a Beautiful
        Auto-da-f, to prevent any further
        Earthquakes: and how Candide was
        publicly whipped                                        23

   VII. How the Old Woman took care of
        Candide, and how he found the Object
        he loved                                                26

  VIII. The History of Cunegonde                                30

    IX. What became of Cunegonde, Candide,
        the Grand Inquisitor, and the Jew                       35

     X. In what distress Candide, Cunegonde,
        and the Old Woman arrived at
        Cadiz; and of their Embarkation                         38

    XI. History of the Old Woman                                42

   XII. The Adventures of the Old Woman
        continued                                               48

  XIII. How Candide was forced away from his
        fair Cunegonde and the Old Woman                        54

   XIV. How Candide and Cacambo were received
        by the Jesuits of Paraguay                              58

    XV. How Candide killed the brother of his
        dear Cunegonde                                          64

   XVI. Adventures of the Two Travellers,
        with Two Girls, Two Monkeys, and
        the Savages called Oreillons                            68

  XVII. Arrival of Candide and his Valet at El
        Dorado, and what they saw there                         74

 XVIII. What they saw in the Country of El
        Dorado                                                  80

   XIX. What happened to them at Surinam and
        how Candide got acquainted with
        Martin                                                  89

    XX. What happened at Sea to Candide and
        Martin                                                  98

   XXI. Candide and Martin, reasoning, draw
        near the Coast of France                               102

  XXII. What happened in France to Candide
        and Martin                                             105

 XXIII. Candide and Martin touched upon the
        Coast of England, and what they saw
        there                                                  122

  XXIV. Of Paquette and Friar Girofle                         125

   XXV. The Visit to Lord Pococurante, a
        Noble Venetian                                         133

  XXVI. Of a Supper which Candide and Martin
        took with Six Strangers, and who
        they were                                              142

 XXVII. Candide's Voyage to Constantinople                     148

XXVIII. What happened to Candide, Cunegonde,
        Pangloss, Martin, etc.                                 154

  XXIX. How Candide found Cunegonde and
        the Old Woman again                                    159

   XXX. The Conclusion                                         161


[Illustration: VOLTAIRE'S CANDIDE]




CANDIDE




I

HOW CANDIDE WAS BROUGHT UP IN A MAGNIFICENT CASTLE, AND HOW HE WAS
EXPELLED THENCE.


In a castle of Westphalia, belonging to the Baron of
Thunder-ten-Tronckh, lived a youth, whom nature had endowed with the
most gentle manners. His countenance was a true picture of his soul. He
combined a true judgment with simplicity of spirit, which was the
reason, I apprehend, of his being called Candide. The old servants of
the family suspected him to have been the son of the Baron's sister, by
a good, honest gentleman of the neighborhood, whom that young lady would
never marry because he had been able to prove only seventy-one
quarterings, the rest of his genealogical tree having been lost through
the injuries of time.

The Baron was one of the most powerful lords in Westphalia, for his
castle had not only a gate, but windows. His great hall, even, was hung
with tapestry. All the dogs of his farm-yards formed a pack of hounds at
need; his grooms were his huntsmen; and the curate of the village was
his grand almoner. They called him "My Lord," and laughed at all his
stories.

The Baron's lady weighed about three hundred and fifty pounds, and was
therefore a person of great consideration, and she did the honours of
the house with a dignity that commanded still greater respect. Her
daughter Cunegonde was seventeen years of age, fresh-coloured, comely,
plump, and desirable. The Baron's son seemed to be in every respect
worthy of his father. The Preceptor Pangloss[1] was the oracle of the
family, and little Candide heard his lessons with all the good faith of
his age and character.

Pangloss was professor of metaphysico-theologico-cosmolo-nigology. He
proved admirably that there is no effect without a cause, and that, in
this best of all possible worlds, the Baron's castle was the most
magnificent of castles, and his lady the best of all possible
Baronesses.

"It is demonstrable," said he, "that things cannot be otherwise than as
they are; for all being created for an end, all is necessarily for the
best end. Observe, that the nose has been formed to bear
spectacles--thus we have spectacles. Legs are visibly designed for
stockings--and we have stockings. Stones were made to be hewn, and to
construct castles--therefore my lord has a magnificent castle; for the
greatest baron in the province ought to be the best lodged. Pigs were
made to be eaten--therefore we eat pork all the year round. Consequently
they who assert that all is well have said a foolish thing, they should
have said all is for the best."

Candide listened attentively and believed innocently; for he thought
Miss Cunegonde extremely beautiful, though he never had the courage to
tell her so. He concluded that after the happiness of being born of
Baron of Thunder-ten-Tronckh, the second degree of happiness was to be
Miss Cunegonde, the third that of seeing her every day, and the fourth
that of hearing Master Pangloss, the greatest philosopher of the whole
province, and consequently of the whole world.

One day Cunegonde, while walking near the castle, in a little wood which
they called a park, saw between the bushes, Dr. Pangloss giving a lesson
in experimental natural philosophy to her mother's chamber-maid, a
little brown wench, very pretty and very docile. As Miss Cunegonde had a
great disposition for the sciences, she breathlessly observed the
repeated experiments of which she was a witness; she clearly perceived
the force of the Doctor's reasons, the effects, and the causes; she
turned back greatly flurried, quite pensive, and filled with the desire
to be learned; dreaming that she might well be a _sufficient reason_ for
young Candide, and he for her.

She met Candide on reaching the castle and blushed; Candide blushed
also; she wished him good morrow in a faltering tone, and Candide spoke
to her without knowing what he said. The next day after dinner, as they
went from table, Cunegonde and Candide found themselves behind a screen;
Cunegonde let fall her handkerchief, Candide picked it up, she took him
innocently by the hand, the youth as innocently kissed the young lady's
hand with particular vivacity, sensibility, and grace; their lips met,
their eyes sparkled, their knees trembled, their hands strayed. Baron
Thunder-ten-Tronckh passed near the screen and beholding this cause and
effect chased Candide from the castle with great kicks on the backside;
Cunegonde fainted away; she was boxed on the ears by the Baroness, as
soon as she came to herself; and all was consternation in this most
magnificent and most agreeable of all possible castles.




II

WHAT BECAME OF CANDIDE AMONG THE BULGARIANS.


Candide, driven from terrestrial paradise, walked a long while without
knowing where, weeping, raising his eyes to heaven, turning them often
towards the most magnificent of castles which imprisoned the purest of
noble young ladies. He lay down to sleep without supper, in the middle
of a field between two furrows. The snow fell in large flakes. Next day
Candide, all benumbed, dragged himself towards the neighbouring town
which was called Waldberghofftrarbk-dikdorff, having no money, dying of
hunger and fatigue, he stopped sorrowfully at the door of an inn. Two
men dressed in blue observed him.

"Comrade," said one, "here is a well-built young fellow, and of proper
height."

They went up to Candide and very civilly invited him to dinner.

"Gentlemen," replied Candide, with a most engaging modesty, "you do me
great honour, but I have not wherewithal to pay my share."

"Oh, sir," said one of the blues to him, "people of your appearance and
of your merit never pay anything: are you not five feet five inches
high?"

"Yes, sir, that is my height," answered he, making a low bow.

"Come, sir, seat yourself; not only will we pay your reckoning, but we
will never suffer such a man as you to want money; men are only born to
assist one another."

"You are right," said Candide; "this is what I was always taught by Mr.
Pangloss, and I see plainly that all is for the best."

They begged of him to accept a few crowns. He took them, and wished to
give them his note; they refused; they seated themselves at table.

"Love you not deeply?"

"Oh yes," answered he; "I deeply love Miss Cunegonde."

"No," said one of the gentlemen, "we ask you if you do not deeply love
the King of the Bulgarians?"

"Not at all," said he; "for I have never seen him."

"What! he is the best of kings, and we must drink his health."

"Oh! very willingly, gentlemen," and he drank.

"That is enough," they tell him. "Now you are the help, the support,
the defender, the hero of the Bulgarians. Your fortune is made, and your
glory is assured."

Instantly they fettered him, and carried him away to the regiment. There
he was made to wheel about to the right, and to the left, to draw his
rammer, to return his rammer, to present, to fire, to march, and they
gave him thirty blows with a cudgel. The next day he did his exercise a
little less badly, and he received but twenty blows. The day following
they gave him only ten, and he was regarded by his comrades as a
prodigy.

Candide, all stupefied, could not yet very well realise how he was a
hero. He resolved one fine day in spring to go for a walk, marching
straight before him, believing that it was a privilege of the human as
well as of the animal species to make use of their legs as they pleased.
He had advanced two leagues when he was overtaken by four others, heroes
of six feet, who bound him and carried him to a dungeon. He was asked
which he would like the best, to be whipped six-and-thirty times through
all the regiment, or to receive at once twelve balls of lead in his
brain. He vainly said that human will is free, and that he chose neither
the one nor the other. He was forced to make a choice; he determined, in
virtue of that gift of God called liberty, to run the gauntlet
six-and-thirty times. He bore this twice. The regiment was composed of
two thousand men; that composed for him four thousand strokes, which
laid bare all his muscles and nerves, from the nape of his neck quite
down to his rump. As they were going to proceed to a third whipping,
Candide, able to bear no more, begged as a favour that they would be so
good as to shoot him. He obtained this favour; they bandaged his eyes,
and bade him kneel down. The King of the Bulgarians passed at this
moment and ascertained the nature of the crime. As he had great talent,
he understood from all that he learnt of Candide that he was a young
metaphysician, extremely ignorant of the things of this world, and he
accorded him his pardon with a clemency which will bring him praise in
all the journals, and throughout all ages.

An able surgeon cured Candide in three weeks by means of emollients
taught by Dioscorides. He had already a little skin, and was able to
march when the King of the Bulgarians gave battle to the King of the
Abares.[2]




III

HOW CANDIDE MADE HIS ESCAPE FROM THE BULGARIANS, AND WHAT AFTERWARDS
BECAME OF HIM.


There was never anything so gallant, so spruce, so brilliant, and so
well disposed as the two armies. Trumpets, fifes, hautboys, drums, and
cannon made music such as Hell itself had never heard. The cannons first
of all laid flat about six thousand men on each side; the muskets swept
away from this best of worlds nine or ten thousand ruffians who infested
its surface. The bayonet was also a _sufficient reason_ for the death of
several thousands. The whole might amount to thirty thousand souls.
Candide, who trembled like a philosopher, hid himself as well as he
could during this heroic butchery.

At length, while the two kings were causing Te Deum to be sung each in
his own camp, Candide resolved to go and reason elsewhere on effects and
causes. He passed over heaps of dead and dying, and first reached a
neighbouring village; it was in cinders, it was an Abare village which
the Bulgarians had burnt according to the laws of war. Here, old men
covered with wounds, beheld their wives, hugging their children to their
bloody breasts, massacred before their faces; there, their daughters,
disembowelled and breathing their last after having satisfied the
natural wants of Bulgarian heroes; while others, half burnt in the
flames, begged to be despatched. The earth was strewed with brains,
arms, and legs.

Candide fled quickly to another village; it belonged to the Bulgarians;
and the Abarian heroes had treated it in the same way. Candide, walking
always over palpitating limbs or across ruins, arrived at last beyond
the seat of war, with a few provisions in his knapsack, and Miss
Cunegonde always in his heart. His provisions failed him when he arrived
in Holland; but having heard that everybody was rich in that country,
and that they were Christians, he did not doubt but he should meet with
the same treatment from them as he had met with in the Baron's castle,
before Miss Cunegonde's bright eyes were the cause of his expulsion
thence.

He asked alms of several grave-looking people, who all answered him,
that if he continued to follow this trade they would confine him to the
house of correction, where he should be taught to get a living.

The next he addressed was a man who had been haranguing a large assembly
for a whole hour on the subject of charity. But the orator, looking
askew, said:

"What are you doing here? Are you for the good cause?"

"There can be no effect without a cause," modestly answered Candide;
"the whole is necessarily concatenated and arranged for the best. It was
necessary for me to have been banished from the presence of Miss
Cunegonde, to have afterwards run the gauntlet, and now it is necessary
I should beg my bread until I learn to earn it; all this cannot be
otherwise."

"My friend," said the orator to him, "do you believe the Pope to be
Anti-Christ?"

"I have not heard it," answered Candide; "but whether he be, or whether
he be not, I want bread."

"Thou dost not deserve to eat," said the other. "Begone, rogue; begone,
wretch; do not come near me again."

The orator's wife, putting her head out of the window, and spying a man
that doubted whether the Pope was Anti-Christ, poured over him a
full.... Oh, heavens! to what excess does religious zeal carry the
ladies.

A man who had never been christened, a good Anabaptist, named James,
beheld the cruel and ignominious treatment shown to one of his
brethren, an unfeathered biped with a rational soul, he took him home,
cleaned him, gave him bread and beer, presented him with two florins,
and even wished to teach him the manufacture of Persian stuffs which
they make in Holland. Candide, almost prostrating himself before him,
cried:

"Master Pangloss has well said that all is for the best in this world,
for I am infinitely more touched by your extreme generosity than with
the inhumanity of that gentleman in the black coat and his lady."

The next day, as he took a walk, he met a beggar all covered with scabs,
his eyes diseased, the end of his nose eaten away, his mouth distorted,
his teeth black, choking in his throat, tormented with a violent cough,
and spitting out a tooth at each effort.




IV

HOW CANDIDE FOUND HIS OLD MASTER PANGLOSS, AND WHAT HAPPENED TO THEM.


Candide, yet more moved with compassion than with horror, gave to this
shocking beggar the two florins which he had received from the honest
Anabaptist James. The spectre looked at him very earnestly, dropped a
few tears, and fell upon his neck. Candide recoiled in disgust.

"Alas!" said one wretch to the other, "do you no longer know your dear
Pangloss?"

"What do I hear? You, my dear master! you in this terrible plight! What
misfortune has happened to you? Why are you no longer in the most
magnificent of castles? What has become of Miss Cunegonde, the pearl of
girls, and nature's masterpiece?"

"I am so weak that I cannot stand," said Pangloss.

Upon which Candide carried him to the Anabaptist's stable, and gave him
a crust of bread. As soon as Pangloss had refreshed himself a little:

"Well," said Candide, "Cunegonde?"

"She is dead," replied the other.

Candide fainted at this word; his friend recalled his senses with a
little bad vinegar which he found by chance in the stable. Candide
reopened his eyes.

"Cunegonde is dead! Ah, best of worlds, where art thou? But of what
illness did she die? Was it not for grief, upon seeing her father kick
me out of his magnificent castle?"

"No," said Pangloss, "she was ripped open by the Bulgarian soldiers,
after having been violated by many; they broke the Baron's head for
attempting to defend her; my lady, her mother, was cut in pieces; my
poor pupil was served just in the same manner as his sister; and as for
the castle, they have not left one stone upon another, not a barn, nor a
sheep, nor a duck, nor a tree; but we have had our revenge, for the
Abares have done the very same thing to a neighbouring barony, which
belonged to a Bulgarian lord."

At this discourse Candide fainted again; but coming to himself, and
having said all that it became him to say, inquired into the cause and
effect, as well as into the _sufficient reason_ that had reduced
Pangloss to so miserable a plight.

"Alas!" said the other, "it was love; love, the comfort of the human
species, the preserver of the universe, the soul of all sensible beings,
love, tender love."

"Alas!" said Candide, "I know this love, that sovereign of hearts, that
soul of our souls; yet it never cost me more than a kiss and twenty
kicks on the backside. How could this beautiful cause produce in you an
effect so abominable?"

Pangloss made answer in these terms: "Oh, my dear Candide, you remember
Paquette, that pretty wench who waited on our noble Baroness; in her
arms I tasted the delights of paradise, which produced in me those hell
torments with which you see me devoured; she was infected with them, she
is perhaps dead of them. This present Paquette received of a learned
Grey Friar, who had traced it to its source; he had had it of an old
countess, who had received it from a cavalry captain, who owed it to a
marchioness, who took it from a page, who had received it from a Jesuit,
who when a novice had it in a direct line from one of the companions of
Christopher Columbus.[3] For my part I shall give it to nobody, I am
dying."

"Oh, Pangloss!" cried Candide, "what a strange genealogy! Is not the
Devil the original stock of it?"

"Not at all," replied this great man, "it was a thing unavoidable, a
necessary ingredient in the best of worlds; for if Columbus had not in
an island of America caught this disease, which contaminates the source
of life, frequently even hinders generation, and which is evidently
opposed to the great end of nature, we should have neither chocolate nor
cochineal. We are also to observe that upon our continent, this
distemper is like religious controversy, confined to a particular spot.
The Turks, the Indians, the Persians, the Chinese, the Siamese, the
Japanese, know nothing of it; but there is a sufficient reason for
believing that they will know it in their turn in a few centuries. In
the meantime, it has made marvellous progress among us, especially in
those great armies composed of honest well-disciplined hirelings, who
decide the destiny of states; for we may safely affirm that when an army
of thirty thousand men fights another of an equal number, there are
about twenty thousand of them p-x-d on each side."

"Well, this is wonderful!" said Candide, "but you must get cured."

"Alas! how can I?" said Pangloss, "I have not a farthing, my friend, and
all over the globe there is no letting of blood or taking a glister,
without paying, or somebody paying for you."

These last words determined Candide; he went and flung himself at the
feet of the charitable Anabaptist James, and gave him so touching a
picture of the state to which his friend was reduced, that the good man
did not scruple to take Dr. Pangloss into his house, and had him cured
at his expense. In the cure Pangloss lost only an eye and an ear. He
wrote well, and knew arithmetic perfectly. The Anabaptist James made him
his bookkeeper. At the end of two months, being obliged to go to Lisbon
about some mercantile affairs, he took the two philosophers with him in
his ship. Pangloss explained to him how everything was so constituted
that it could not be better. James was not of this opinion.

"It is more likely," said he, "mankind have a little corrupted nature,
for they were not born wolves, and they have become wolves; God has
given them neither cannon of four-and-twenty pounders, nor bayonets; and
yet they have made cannon and bayonets to destroy one another. Into this
account I might throw not only bankrupts, but Justice which seizes on
the effects of bankrupts to cheat the creditors."

"All this was indispensable," replied the one-eyed doctor, "for private
misfortunes make the general good, so that the more private misfortunes
there are the greater is the general good."

While he reasoned, the sky darkened, the winds blew from the four
quarters, and the ship was assailed by a most terrible tempest within
sight of the port of Lisbon.




V

TEMPEST, SHIPWRECK, EARTHQUAKE, AND WHAT BECAME OF DOCTOR PANGLOSS,
CANDIDE, AND JAMES THE ANABAPTIST.


Half dead of that inconceivable anguish which the rolling of a ship
produces, one-half of the passengers were not even sensible of the
danger. The other half shrieked and prayed. The sheets were rent, the
masts broken, the vessel gaped. Work who would, no one heard, no one
commanded. The Anabaptist being upon deck bore a hand; when a brutish
sailor struck him roughly and laid him sprawling; but with the violence
of the blow he himself tumbled head foremost overboard, and stuck upon a
piece of the broken mast. Honest James ran to his assistance, hauled him
up, and from the effort he made was precipitated into the sea in sight
of the sailor, who left him to perish, without deigning to look at him.
Candide drew near and saw his benefactor, who rose above the water one
moment and was then swallowed up for ever. He was just going to jump
after him, but was prevented by the philosopher Pangloss, who
demonstrated to him that the Bay of Lisbon had been made on purpose for
the Anabaptist to be drowned. While he was proving this _ priori_, the
ship foundered; all perished except Pangloss, Candide, and that brutal
sailor who had drowned the good Anabaptist. The villain swam safely to
the shore, while Pangloss and Candide were borne thither upon a plank.

As soon as they recovered themselves a little they walked toward Lisbon.
They had some money left, with which they hoped to save themselves from
starving, after they had escaped drowning. Scarcely had they reached the
city, lamenting the death of their benefactor, when they felt the earth
tremble under their feet. The sea swelled and foamed in the harbour, and
beat to pieces the vessels riding at anchor. Whirlwinds of fire and
ashes covered the streets and public places; houses fell, roofs were
flung upon the pavements, and the pavements were scattered. Thirty
thousand inhabitants of all ages and sexes were crushed under the
ruins.[4] The sailor, whistling and swearing, said there was booty to be
gained here.

"What can be the _sufficient reason_ of this phenomenon?" said Pangloss.

"This is the Last Day!" cried Candide.

The sailor ran among the ruins, facing death to find money; finding it,
he took it, got drunk, and having slept himself sober, purchased the
favours of the first good-natured wench whom he met on the ruins of the
destroyed houses, and in the midst of the dying and the dead. Pangloss
pulled him by the sleeve.

"My friend," said he, "this is not right. You sin against the _universal
reason_; you choose your time badly."

"S'blood and fury!" answered the other; "I am a sailor and born at
Batavia. Four times have I trampled upon the crucifix in four voyages to
Japan[5]; a fig for thy universal reason."

Some falling stones had wounded Candide. He lay stretched in the street
covered with rubbish.

"Alas!" said he to Pangloss, "get me a little wine and oil; I am dying."

"This concussion of the earth is no new thing," answered Pangloss. "The
city of Lima, in America, experienced the same convulsions last year;
the same cause, the same effects; there is certainly a train of sulphur
under ground from Lima to Lisbon."

"Nothing more probable," said Candide; "but for the love of God a little
oil and wine."

"How, probable?" replied the philosopher. "I maintain that the point is
capable of being demonstrated."

Candide fainted away, and Pangloss fetched him some water from a
neighbouring fountain. The following day they rummaged among the ruins
and found provisions, with which they repaired their exhausted strength.
After this they joined with others in relieving those inhabitants who
had escaped death. Some, whom they had succoured, gave them as good a
dinner as they could in such disastrous circumstances; true, the repast
was mournful, and the company moistened their bread with tears; but
Pangloss consoled them, assuring them that things could not be
otherwise.

"For," said he, "all that is is for the best. If there is a volcano at
Lisbon it cannot be elsewhere. It is impossible that things should be
other than they are; for everything is right."

A little man dressed in black, Familiar of the Inquisition, who sat by
him, politely took up his word and said:

"Apparently, then, sir, you do not believe in original sin; for if all
is for the best there has then been neither Fall nor punishment."

"I humbly ask your Excellency's pardon," answered Pangloss, still more
politely; "for the Fall and curse of man necessarily entered into the
system of the best of worlds."

"Sir," said the Familiar, "you do not then believe in liberty?"

"Your Excellency will excuse me," said Pangloss; "liberty is consistent
with absolute necessity, for it was necessary we should be free; for, in
short, the determinate will----"

Pangloss was in the middle of his sentence, when the Familiar beckoned
to his footman, who gave him a glass of wine from Porto or Opporto.




VI

HOW THE PORTUGUESE MADE A BEAUTIFUL AUTO-DA-F, TO PREVENT ANY FURTHER
EARTHQUAKES; AND HOW CANDIDE WAS PUBLICLY WHIPPED.


After the earthquake had destroyed three-fourths of Lisbon, the sages of
that country could think of no means more effectual to prevent utter
ruin than to give the people a beautiful _auto-da-f_[6]; for it had
been decided by the University of Coimbra, that the burning of a few
people alive by a slow fire, and with great ceremony, is an infallible
secret to hinder the earth from quaking.

In consequence hereof, they had seized on a Biscayner, convicted of
having married his godmother, and on two Portuguese, for rejecting the
bacon which larded a chicken they were eating[7]; after dinner, they
came and secured Dr. Pangloss, and his disciple Candide, the one for
speaking his mind, the other for having listened with an air of
approbation. They were conducted to separate apartments, extremely cold,
as they were never incommoded by the sun. Eight days after they were
dressed in _san-benitos_[8] and their heads ornamented with paper
mitres. The mitre and _san-benito_ belonging to Candide were painted
with reversed flames and with devils that had neither tails nor claws;
but Pangloss's devils had claws and tails and the flames were upright.
They marched in procession thus habited and heard a very pathetic
sermon, followed by fine church music. Candide was whipped in cadence
while they were singing; the Biscayner, and the two men who had refused
to eat bacon, were burnt; and Pangloss was hanged, though that was not
the custom. The same day the earth sustained a most violent concussion.

Candide, terrified, amazed, desperate, all bloody, all palpitating, said
to himself:

"If this is the best of possible worlds, what then are the others? Well,
if I had been only whipped I could put up with it, for I experienced
that among the Bulgarians; but oh, my dear Pangloss! thou greatest of
philosophers, that I should have seen you hanged, without knowing for
what! Oh, my dear Anabaptist, thou best of men, that thou should'st have
been drowned in the very harbour! Oh, Miss Cunegonde, thou pearl of
girls! that thou should'st have had thy belly ripped open!"

Thus he was musing, scarce able to stand, preached at, whipped,
absolved, and blessed, when an old woman accosted him saying:

"My son, take courage and follow me."




VII

HOW THE OLD WOMAN TOOK CARE OF CANDIDE, AND HOW HE FOUND THE OBJECT HE
LOVED.


Candide did not take courage, but followed the old woman to a decayed
house, where she gave him a pot of pomatum to anoint his sores, showed
him a very neat little bed, with a suit of clothes hanging up, and left
him something to eat and drink.

"Eat, drink, sleep," said she, "and may our lady of Atocha,[9] the great
St. Anthony of Padua, and the great St. James of Compostella, receive
you under their protection. I shall be back to-morrow."

Candide, amazed at all he had suffered and still more with the charity
of the old woman, wished to kiss her hand.

"It is not my hand you must kiss," said the old woman; "I shall be back
to-morrow. Anoint yourself with the pomatum, eat and sleep."

Candide, notwithstanding so many disasters, ate and slept. The next
morning the old woman brought him his breakfast, looked at his back, and
rubbed it herself with another ointment: in like manner she brought him
his dinner; and at night she returned with his supper. The day following
she went through the very same ceremonies.

"Who are you?" said Candide; "who has inspired you with so much
goodness? What return can I make you?"

The good woman made no answer; she returned in the evening, but brought
no supper.

"Come with me," she said, "and say nothing."

She took him by the arm, and walked with him about a quarter of a mile
into the country; they arrived at a lonely house, surrounded with
gardens and canals. The old woman knocked at a little door, it opened,
she led Candide up a private staircase into a small apartment richly
furnished. She left him on a brocaded sofa, shut the door and went away.
Candide thought himself in a dream; indeed, that he had been dreaming
unluckily all his life, and that the present moment was the only
agreeable part of it all.

The old woman returned very soon, supporting with difficulty a trembling
woman of a majestic figure, brilliant with jewels, and covered with a
veil.

"Take off that veil," said the old woman to Candide.

The young man approaches, he raises the veil with a timid hand. Oh!
what a moment! what surprise! he believes he beholds Miss Cunegonde? he
really sees her! it is herself! His strength fails him, he cannot utter
a word, but drops at her feet. Cunegonde falls upon the sofa. The old
woman supplies a smelling bottle; they come to themselves and recover
their speech. As they began with broken accents, with questions and
answers interchangeably interrupted with sighs, with tears, and cries.
The old woman desired they would make less noise and then she left them
to themselves.

"What, is it you?" said Candide, "you live? I find you again in
Portugal? then you have not been ravished? then they did not rip open
your belly as Doctor Pangloss informed me?"

"Yes, they did," said the beautiful Cunegonde; "but those two accidents
are not always mortal."

"But were your father and mother killed?"

"It is but too true," answered Cunegonde, in tears.

"And your brother?"

"My brother also was killed."

"And why are you in Portugal? and how did you know of my being here? and
by what strange adventure did you contrive to bring me to this house?"

"I will tell you all that," replied the lady, "but first of all let me
know your history, since the innocent kiss you gave me and the kicks
which you received."

Candide respectfully obeyed her, and though he was still in a surprise,
though his voice was feeble and trembling, though his back still pained
him, yet he gave her a most ingenuous account of everything that had
befallen him since the moment of their separation. Cunegonde lifted up
her eyes to heaven; shed tears upon hearing of the death of the good
Anabaptist and of Pangloss; after which she spoke as follows to Candide,
who did not lose a word and devoured her with his eyes.




VIII

THE HISTORY OF CUNEGONDE.


"I was in bed and fast asleep when it pleased God to send the Bulgarians
to our delightful castle of Thunder-ten-Tronckh; they slew my father and
brother, and cut my mother in pieces. A tall Bulgarian, six feet high,
perceiving that I had fainted away at this sight, began to ravish me;
this made me recover; I regained my senses, I cried, I struggled, I bit,
I scratched, I wanted to tear out the tall Bulgarian's eyes--not knowing
that what happened at my father's house was the usual practice of war.
The brute gave me a cut in the left side with his hanger, and the mark
is still upon me."

"Ah! I hope I shall see it," said honest Candide.

"You shall," said Cunegonde, "but let us continue."

"Do so," replied Candide.

Thus she resumed the thread of her story:

"A Bulgarian captain came in, saw me all bleeding, and the soldier not
in the least disconcerted. The captain flew into a passion at the
disrespectful behaviour of the brute, and slew him on my body. He
ordered my wounds to be dressed, and took me to his quarters as a
prisoner of war. I washed the few shirts that he had, I did his cooking;
he thought me very pretty--he avowed it; on the other hand, I must own
he had a good shape, and a soft and white skin; but he had little or no
mind or philosophy, and you might see plainly that he had never been
instructed by Doctor Pangloss. In three months time, having lost all his
money, and being grown tired of my company, he sold me to a Jew, named
Don Issachar, who traded to Holland and Portugal, and had a strong
passion for women. This Jew was much attached to my person, but could
not triumph over it; I resisted him better than the Bulgarian soldier. A
modest woman may be ravished once, but her virtue is strengthened by it.
In order to render me more tractable, he brought me to this country
house. Hitherto I had imagined that nothing could equal the beauty of
Thunder-ten-Tronckh Castle; but I found I was mistaken.

"The Grand Inquisitor, seeing me one day at Mass, stared long at me, and
sent to tell me that he wished to speak on private matters. I was
conducted to his palace, where I acquainted him with the history of my
family, and he represented to me how much it was beneath my rank to
belong to an Israelite. A proposal was then made to Don Issachar that he
should resign me to my lord. Don Issachar, being the court banker, and a
man of credit, would hear nothing of it. The Inquisitor threatened him
with an _auto-da-f_. At last my Jew, intimidated, concluded a bargain,
by which the house and myself should belong to both in common; the Jew
should have for himself Monday, Wednesday, and Saturday, and the
Inquisitor should have the rest of the week. It is now six months since
this agreement was made. Quarrels have not been wanting, for they could
not decide whether the night from Saturday to Sunday belonged to the old
law or to the new. For my part, I have so far held out against both, and
I verily believe that this is the reason why I am still beloved.

"At length, to avert the scourge of earthquakes, and to intimidate Don
Issachar, my Lord Inquisitor was pleased to celebrate an _auto-da-f_.
He did me the honour to invite me to the ceremony. I had a very good
seat, and the ladies were served with refreshments between Mass and the
execution. I was in truth seized with horror at the burning of those two
Jews, and of the honest Biscayner who had married his godmother; but
what was my surprise, my fright, my trouble, when I saw in a
_san-benito_ and mitre a figure which resembled that of Pangloss! I
rubbed my eyes, I looked at him attentively, I saw him hung; I fainted.
Scarcely had I recovered my senses than I saw you stripped, stark naked,
and this was the height of my horror, consternation, grief, and despair.
I tell you, truthfully, that your skin is yet whiter and of a more
perfect colour than that of my Bulgarian captain. This spectacle
redoubled all the feelings which overwhelmed and devoured me. I screamed
out, and would have said, 'Stop, barbarians!' but my voice failed me,
and my cries would have been useless after you had been severely
whipped. How is it possible, said I, that the beloved Candide and the
wise Pangloss should both be at Lisbon, the one to receive a hundred
lashes, and the other to be hanged by the Grand Inquisitor, of whom I am
the well-beloved? Pangloss most cruelly deceived me when he said that
everything in the world is for the best.

"Agitated, lost, sometimes beside myself, and sometimes ready to die of
weakness, my mind was filled with the massacre of my father, mother, and
brother, with the insolence of the ugly Bulgarian soldier, with the stab
that he gave me, with my servitude under the Bulgarian captain, with my
hideous Don Issachar, with my abominable Inquisitor, with the execution
of Doctor Pangloss, with the grand Miserere to which they whipped you,
and especially with the kiss I gave you behind the screen the day that I
had last seen you. I praised God for bringing you back to me after so
many trials, and I charged my old woman to take care of you, and to
conduct you hither as soon as possible. She has executed her commission
perfectly well; I have tasted the inexpressible pleasure of seeing you
again, of hearing you, of speaking with you. But you must be hungry, for
myself, I am famished; let us have supper."

They both sat down to table, and, when supper was over, they placed
themselves once more on the sofa; where they were when Signor Don
Issachar arrived. It was the Jewish Sabbath, and Issachar had come to
enjoy his rights, and to explain his tender love.




IX

WHAT BECAME OF CUNEGONDE, CANDIDE, THE GRAND INQUISITOR, AND THE JEW.


This Issachar was the most choleric Hebrew that had ever been seen in
Israel since the Captivity in Babylon.

"What!" said he, "thou bitch of a Galilean, was not the Inquisitor
enough for thee? Must this rascal also share with me?"

In saying this he drew a long poniard which he always carried about him;
and not imagining that his adversary had any arms he threw himself upon
Candide: but our honest Westphalian had received a handsome sword from
the old woman along with the suit of clothes. He drew his rapier,
despite his gentleness, and laid the Israelite stone dead upon the
cushions at Cunegonde's feet.

"Holy Virgin!" cried she, "what will become of us? A man killed in my
apartment! If the officers of justice come, we are lost!"

"Had not Pangloss been hanged," said Candide, "he would give us good
counsel in this emergency, for he was a profound philosopher. Failing
him let us consult the old woman."

She was very prudent and commenced to give her opinion when suddenly
another little door opened. It was an hour after midnight, it was the
beginning of Sunday. This day belonged to my lord the Inquisitor. He
entered, and saw the whipped Candide, sword in hand, a dead man upon the
floor, Cunegonde aghast, and the old woman giving counsel.

At this moment, the following is what passed in the soul of Candide, and
how he reasoned:

If this holy man call in assistance, he will surely have me burnt; and
Cunegonde will perhaps be served in the same manner; he was the cause of
my being cruelly whipped; he is my rival; and, as I have now begun to
kill, I will kill away, for there is no time to hesitate. This reasoning
was clear and instantaneous; so that without giving time to the
Inquisitor to recover from his surprise, he pierced him through and
through, and cast him beside the Jew.

"Yet again!" said Cunegonde, "now there is no mercy for us, we are
excommunicated, our last hour has come. How could you do it? you,
naturally so gentle, to slay a Jew and a prelate in two minutes!"

"My beautiful young lady," responded Candide, "when one is a lover,
jealous and whipped by the Inquisition, one stops at nothing."

The old woman then put in her word, saying:

"There are three Andalusian horses in the stable with bridles and
saddles, let the brave Candide get them ready; madame has money, jewels;
let us therefore mount quickly on horseback, though I can sit only on
one buttock; let us set out for Cadiz, it is the finest weather in the
world, and there is great pleasure in travelling in the cool of the
night."

Immediately Candide saddled the three horses, and Cunegonde, the old
woman and he, travelled thirty miles at a stretch. While they were
journeying, the Holy Brotherhood entered the house; my lord the
Inquisitor was interred in a handsome church, and Issachar's body was
thrown upon a dunghill.

Candide, Cunegonde, and the old woman, had now reached the little town
of Avacena in the midst of the mountains of the Sierra Morena, and were
speaking as follows in a public inn.




X

IN WHAT DISTRESS CANDIDE, CUNEGONDE, AND THE OLD WOMAN ARRIVED AT CADIZ;
AND OF THEIR EMBARKATION.


"Who was it that robbed me of my money and jewels?" said Cunegonde, all
bathed in tears. "How shall we live? What shall we do? Where find
Inquisitors or Jews who will give me more?"

"Alas!" said the old woman, "I have a shrewd suspicion of a reverend
Grey Friar, who stayed last night in the same inn with us at Badajos.
God preserve me from judging rashly, but he came into our room twice,
and he set out upon his journey long before us."

"Alas!" said Candide, "dear Pangloss has often demonstrated to me that
the goods of this world are common to all men, and that each has an
equal right to them. But according to these principles the Grey Friar
ought to have left us enough to carry us through our journey. Have you
nothing at all left, my dear Cunegonde?"

"Not a farthing," said she.

"What then must we do?" said Candide.

"Sell one of the horses," replied the old woman. "I will ride behind
Miss Cunegonde, though I can hold myself only on one buttock, and we
shall reach Cadiz."

In the same inn there was a Benedictine prior who bought the horse for a
cheap price. Candide, Cunegonde, and the old woman, having passed
through Lucena, Chillas, and Lebrixa, arrived at length at Cadiz. A
fleet was there getting ready, and troops assembling to bring to reason
the reverend Jesuit Fathers of Paraguay, accused of having made one of
the native tribes in the neighborhood of San Sacrament revolt against
the Kings of Spain and Portugal. Candide having been in the Bulgarian
service, performed the military exercise before the general of this
little army with so graceful an address, with so intrepid an air, and
with such agility and expedition, that he was given the command of a
company of foot. Now, he was a captain! He set sail with Miss Cunegonde,
the old woman, two valets, and the two Andalusian horses, which had
belonged to the grand Inquisitor of Portugal.

During their voyage they reasoned a good deal on the philosophy of poor
Pangloss.

"We are going into another world," said Candide; "and surely it must be
there that all is for the best. For I must confess there is reason to
complain a little of what passeth in our world in regard to both
natural and moral philosophy."

"I love you with all my heart," said Cunegonde; "but my soul is still
full of fright at that which I have seen and experienced."

"All will be well," replied Candide; "the sea of this new world is
already better than our European sea; it is calmer, the winds more
regular. It is certainly the New World which is the best of all possible
worlds."

"God grant it," said Cunegonde; "but I have been so horribly unhappy
there that my heart is almost closed to hope."

"You complain," said the old woman; "alas! you have not known such
misfortunes as mine."

Cunegonde almost broke out laughing, finding the good woman very
amusing, for pretending to have been as unfortunate as she.

"Alas!" said Cunegonde, "my good mother, unless you have been ravished
by two Bulgarians, have received two deep wounds in your belly, have had
two castles demolished, have had two mothers cut to pieces before your
eyes, and two of your lovers whipped at an _auto-da-f_, I do not
conceive how you could be more unfortunate than I. Add that I was born a
baroness of seventy-two quarterings--and have been a cook!"

"Miss," replied the old woman, "you do not know my birth; and were I to
show you my backside, you would not talk in that manner, but would
suspend your judgment."

This speech having raised extreme curiosity in the minds of Cunegonde
and Candide, the old woman spoke to them as follows.




XI

HISTORY OF THE OLD WOMAN.


"I had not always bleared eyes and red eyelids; neither did my nose
always touch my chin; nor was I always a servant. I am the daughter of
Pope Urban X,[10] and of the Princess of Palestrina. Until the age of
fourteen I was brought up in a palace, to which all the castles of your
German barons would scarcely have served for stables; and one of my
robes was worth more than all the magnificence of Westphalia. As I grew
up I improved in beauty, wit, and every graceful accomplishment, in the
midst of pleasures, hopes, and respectful homage. Already I inspired
love. My throat was formed, and such a throat! white, firm, and shaped
like that of the Venus of Medici; and what eyes! what eyelids! what
black eyebrows! such flames darted from my dark pupils that they
eclipsed the scintillation of the stars--as I was told by the poets in
our part of the world. My waiting women, when dressing and undressing
me, used to fall into an ecstasy, whether they viewed me before or
behind; how glad would the gentlemen have been to perform that office
for them!

"I was affianced to the most excellent Prince of Massa Carara. Such a
prince! as handsome as myself, sweet-tempered, agreeable, brilliantly
witty, and sparkling with love. I loved him as one loves for the first
time--with idolatry, with transport. The nuptials were prepared. There
was surprising pomp and magnificence; there were _ftes_, carousals,
continual _opera bouffe_; and all Italy composed sonnets in my praise,
though not one of them was passable. I was just upon the point of
reaching the summit of bliss, when an old marchioness who had been
mistress to the Prince, my husband, invited him to drink chocolate with
her. He died in less than two hours of most terrible convulsions. But
this is only a bagatelle. My mother, in despair, and scarcely less
afflicted than myself, determined to absent herself for some time from
so fatal a place. She had a very fine estate in the neighbourhood of
Gaeta. We embarked on board a galley of the country which was gilded
like the great altar of St. Peter's at Rome. A Sallee corsair swooped
down and boarded us. Our men defended themselves like the Pope's
soldiers; they flung themselves upon their knees, and threw down their
arms, begging of the corsair an absolution _in articulo mortis_.

"Instantly they were stripped as bare as monkeys; my mother, our maids
of honour, and myself were all served in the same manner. It is amazing
with what expedition those gentry undress people. But what surprised me
most was, that they thrust their fingers into the part of our bodies
which the generality of women suffer no other instrument but--pipes to
enter. It appeared to me a very strange kind of ceremony; but thus one
judges of things when one has not seen the world. I afterwards learnt
that it was to try whether we had concealed any diamonds. This is the
practice established from time immemorial, among civilised nations that
scour the seas. I was informed that the very religious Knights of Malta
never fail to make this search when they take any Turkish prisoners of
either sex. It is a law of nations from which they never deviate.

"I need not tell _you_ how great a hardship it was for a young princess
and her mother to be made slaves and carried to Morocco. You may easily
imagine all we had to suffer on board the pirate vessel. My mother was
still very handsome; our maids of honour, and even our waiting women,
had more charms than are to be found in all Africa. As for myself, I was
ravishing, was exquisite, grace itself, and I was a virgin! I did not
remain so long; this flower, which had been reserved for the handsome
Prince of Massa Carara, was plucked by the corsair captain. He was an
abominable negro, and yet believed that he did me a great deal of
honour. Certainly the Princess of Palestrina and myself must have been
very strong to go through all that we experienced until our arrival at
Morocco. But let us pass on; these are such common things as not to be
worth mentioning.

"Morocco swam in blood when we arrived. Fifty sons of the Emperor
Muley-Ismael[11] had each their adherents; this produced fifty civil
wars, of blacks against blacks, and blacks against tawnies, and tawnies
against tawnies, and mulattoes against mulattoes. In short it was a
continual carnage throughout the empire.

"No sooner were we landed, than the blacks of a contrary faction to that
of my captain attempted to rob him of his booty. Next to jewels and gold
we were the most valuable things he had. I was witness to such a battle
as you have never seen in your European climates. The northern nations
have not that heat in their blood, nor that raging lust for women, so
common in Africa. It seems that you Europeans have only milk in your
veins; but it is vitriol, it is fire which runs in those of the
inhabitants of Mount Atlas and the neighbouring countries. They fought
with the fury of the lions, tigers, and serpents of the country, to see
who should have us. A Moor seized my mother by the right arm, while my
captain's lieutenant held her by the left; a Moorish soldier had hold of
her by one leg, and one of our corsairs held her by the other. Thus
almost all our women were drawn in quarters by four men. My captain
concealed me behind him; and with his drawn scimitar cut and slashed
every one that opposed his fury. At length I saw all our Italian women,
and my mother herself, torn, mangled, massacred, by the monsters who
disputed over them. The slaves, my companions, those who had taken them,
soldiers, sailors, blacks, whites, mulattoes, and at last my captain,
all were killed, and I remained dying on a heap of dead. Such scenes as
this were transacted through an extent of three hundred leagues--and yet
they never missed the five prayers a day ordained by Mahomet.

"With difficulty I disengaged myself from such a heap of slaughtered
bodies, and crawled to a large orange tree on the bank of a neighbouring
rivulet, where I fell, oppressed with fright, fatigue, horror, despair,
and hunger. Immediately after, my senses, overpowered, gave themselves
up to sleep, which was yet more swooning than repose. I was in this
state of weakness and insensibility, between life and death, when I
felt myself pressed by something that moved upon my body. I opened my
eyes, and saw a white man, of good countenance, who sighed, and who said
between his teeth: '_O che sciagura d'essere senza coglioni!_'"[12]




XII

THE ADVENTURES OF THE OLD WOMAN CONTINUED.


"Astonished and delighted to hear my native language, and no less
surprised at what this man said, I made answer that there were much
greater misfortunes than that of which he complained. I told him in a
few words of the horrors which I had endured, and fainted a second time.
He carried me to a neighbouring house, put me to bed, gave me food,
waited upon me, consoled me, flattered me; he told me that he had never
seen any one so beautiful as I, and that he never so much regretted the
loss of what it was impossible to recover.

"'I was born at Naples,' said he, 'there they geld two or three thousand
children every year; some die of the operation, others acquire a voice
more beautiful than that of women, and others are raised to offices of
state.[13] This operation was performed on me with great success and I
was chapel musician to madam, the Princess of Palestrina.'

"'To my mother!' cried I.

"'Your mother!' cried he, weeping. 'What! can you be that young
princess whom I brought up until the age of six years, and who promised
so early to be as beautiful as you?'

"'It is I, indeed; but my mother lies four hundred yards hence, torn in
quarters, under a heap of dead bodies.'

"I told him all my adventures, and he made me acquainted with his;
telling me that he had been sent to the Emperor of Morocco by a
Christian power, to conclude a treaty with that prince, in consequence
of which he was to be furnished with military stores and ships to help
to demolish the commerce of other Christian Governments.

"'My mission is done,' said this honest eunuch; 'I go to embark for
Ceuta, and will take you to Italy. _Ma che sciagura d'essere senza
coglioni!_'

"I thanked him with tears of commiseration; and instead of taking me to
Italy he conducted me to Algiers, where he sold me to the Dey. Scarcely
was I sold, than the plague which had made the tour of Africa, Asia, and
Europe, broke out with great malignancy in Algiers. You have seen
earthquakes; but pray, miss, have you ever had the plague?"

"Never," answered Cunegonde.

"If you had," said the old woman, "you would acknowledge that it is far
more terrible than an earthquake. It is common in Africa, and I caught
it. Imagine to yourself the distressed situation of the daughter of a
Pope, only fifteen years old, who, in less than three months, had felt
the miseries of poverty and slavery, had been ravished almost every day,
had beheld her mother drawn in quarters, had experienced famine and war,
and was dying of the plague in Algiers. I did not die, however, but my
eunuch, and the Dey, and almost the whole seraglio of Algiers perished.

"As soon as the first fury of this terrible pestilence was over, a sale
was made of the Dey's slaves; I was purchased by a merchant, and carried
to Tunis; this man sold me to another merchant, who sold me again to
another at Tripoli; from Tripoli I was sold to Alexandria, from
Alexandria to Smyrna, and from Smyrna to Constantinople. At length I
became the property of an Aga of the Janissaries, who was soon ordered
away to the defence of Azof, then besieged by the Russians.

"The Aga, who was a very gallant man, took his whole seraglio with him,
and lodged us in a small fort on the Palus Motides, guarded by two
black eunuchs and twenty soldiers. The Turks killed prodigious numbers
of the Russians, but the latter had their revenge. Azof was destroyed by
fire, the inhabitants put to the sword, neither sex nor age was spared;
until there remained only our little fort, and the enemy wanted to
starve us out. The twenty Janissaries had sworn they would never
surrender. The extremities of famine to which they were reduced, obliged
them to eat our two eunuchs, for fear of violating their oath. And at
the end of a few days they resolved also to devour the women.

"We had a very pious and humane Iman, who preached an excellent sermon,
exhorting them not to kill us all at once.

"'Only cut off a buttock of each of those ladies,' said he, 'and you'll
fare extremely well; if you must go to it again, there will be the same
entertainment a few days hence; heaven will accept of so charitable an
action, and send you relief.'

"He had great eloquence; he persuaded them; we underwent this terrible
operation. The Iman applied the same balsam to us, as he does to
children after circumcision; and we all nearly died.

"Scarcely had the Janissaries finished the repast with which we had
furnished them, than the Russians came in flat-bottomed boats; not a
Janissary escaped. The Russians paid no attention to the condition we
were in. There are French surgeons in all parts of the world; one of
them who was very clever took us under his care--he cured us; and as
long as I live I shall remember that as soon as my wounds were healed he
made proposals to me. He bid us all be of good cheer, telling us that
the like had happened in many sieges, and that it was according to the
laws of war.

"As soon as my companions could walk, they were obliged to set out for
Moscow. I fell to the share of a Boyard who made me his gardener, and
gave me twenty lashes a day. But this nobleman having in two years' time
been broke upon the wheel along with thirty more Boyards for some broils
at court, I profited by that event; I fled. I traversed all Russia; I
was a long time an inn-holder's servant at Riga, the same at Rostock, at
Vismar, at Leipzig, at Cassel, at Utrecht, at Leyden, at the Hague, at
Rotterdam. I waxed old in misery and disgrace, having only one-half of
my posteriors, and always remembering I was a Pope's daughter. A hundred
times I was upon the point of killing myself; but still I loved life.
This ridiculous foible is perhaps one of our most fatal characteristics;
for is there anything more absurd than to wish to carry continually a
burden which one can always throw down? to detest existence and yet to
cling to one's existence? in brief, to caress the serpent which devours
us, till he has eaten our very heart?

"In the different countries which it has been my lot to traverse, and
the numerous inns where I have been servant, I have taken notice of a
vast number of people who held their own existence in abhorrence, and
yet I never knew of more than eight who voluntarily put an end to their
misery; three negroes, four Englishmen, and a German professor named
Robek.[14] I ended by being servant to the Jew, Don Issachar, who placed
me near your presence, my fair lady. I am determined to share your fate,
and have been much more affected with your misfortunes than with my own.
I would never even have spoken to you of my misfortunes, had you not
piqued me a little, and if it were not customary to tell stories on
board a ship in order to pass away the time. In short, Miss Cunegonde, I
have had experience, I know the world; therefore I advise you to divert
yourself, and prevail upon each passenger to tell his story; and if
there be one of them all, that has not cursed his life many a time, that
has not frequently looked upon himself as the unhappiest of mortals, I
give you leave to throw me headforemost into the sea."




XIII

HOW CANDIDE WAS FORCED AWAY FROM HIS FAIR CUNEGONDE AND THE OLD WOMAN.


The beautiful Cunegonde having heard the old woman's history, paid her
all the civilities due to a person of her rank and merit. She likewise
accepted her proposal, and engaged all the passengers, one after the
other, to relate their adventures; and then both she and Candide allowed
that the old woman was in the right.

"It is a great pity," said Candide, "that the sage Pangloss was hanged
contrary to custom at an _auto-da-f_; he would tell us most amazing
things in regard to the physical and moral evils that overspread earth
and sea, and I should be able, with due respect, to make a few
objections."

While each passenger was recounting his story, the ship made her way.
They landed at Buenos Ayres. Cunegonde, Captain Candide, and the old
woman, waited on the Governor, Don Fernando d'Ibaraa, y Figueora, y
Mascarenes, y Lampourdos, y Souza. This nobleman had a stateliness
becoming a person who bore so many names. He spoke to men with so noble
a disdain, carried his nose so loftily, raised his voice so
unmercifully, assumed so imperious an air, and stalked with such
intolerable pride, that those who saluted him were strongly inclined to
give him a good drubbing. Cunegonde appeared to him the most beautiful
he had ever met. The first thing he did was to ask whether she was not
the captain's wife. The manner in which he asked the question alarmed
Candide; he durst not say she was his wife, because indeed she was not;
neither durst he say she was his sister, because it was not so; and
although this obliging lie had been formerly much in favour among the
ancients, and although it could be useful to the moderns, his soul was
too pure to betray the truth.

"Miss Cunegonde," said he, "is to do me the honour to marry me, and we
beseech your excellency to deign to sanction our marriage."

Don Fernando d'Ibaraa, y Figueora, y Mascarenes, y Lampourdos, y Souza,
turning up his moustachios, smiled mockingly, and ordered Captain
Candide to go and review his company. Candide obeyed, and the Governor
remained alone with Miss Cunegonde. He declared his passion, protesting
he would marry her the next day in the face of the church, or otherwise,
just as should be agreeable to herself. Cunegonde asked a quarter of an
hour to consider of it, to consult the old woman, and to take her
resolution.

The old woman spoke thus to Cunegonde:

"Miss, you have seventy-two quarterings, and not a farthing; it is now
in your power to be wife to the greatest lord in South America, who has
very beautiful moustachios. Is it for you to pique yourself upon
inviolable fidelity? You have been ravished by Bulgarians; a Jew and an
Inquisitor have enjoyed your favours. Misfortune gives sufficient
excuse. I own, that if I were in your place, I should have no scruple in
marrying the Governor and in making the fortune of Captain Candide."

While the old woman spoke with all the prudence which age and experience
gave, a small ship entered the port on board of which were an Alcalde
and his alguazils, and this was what had happened.

As the old woman had shrewdly guessed, it was a Grey Friar who stole
Cunegonde's money and jewels in the town of Badajos, when she and
Candide were escaping. The Friar wanted to sell some of the diamonds to
a jeweller; the jeweller knew them to be the Grand Inquisitor's. The
Friar before he was hanged confessed he had stolen them. He described
the persons, and the route they had taken. The flight of Cunegonde and
Candide was already known. They were traced to Cadiz. A vessel was
immediately sent in pursuit of them. The vessel was already in the port
of Buenos Ayres. The report spread that the Alcalde was going to land,
and that he was in pursuit of the murderers of my lord the Grand
Inquisitor. The prudent old woman saw at once what was to be done.

"You cannot run away," said she to Cunegonde, "and you have nothing to
fear, for it was not you that killed my lord; besides the Governor who
loves you will not suffer you to be ill-treated; therefore stay."

She then ran immediately to Candide.

"Fly," said she, "or in an hour you will be burnt."

There was not a moment to lose; but how could he part from Cunegonde,
and where could he flee for shelter?




XIV

HOW CANDIDE AND CACAMBO WERE RECEIVED BY THE JESUITS OF PARAGUAY.


Candide had brought such a valet with him from Cadiz, as one often meets
with on the coasts of Spain and in the American colonies. He was a
quarter Spaniard, born of a mongrel in Tucuman; he had been singing-boy,
sacristan, sailor, monk, pedlar, soldier, and lackey. His name was
Cacambo, and he loved his master, because his master was a very good
man. He quickly saddled the two Andalusian horses.

"Come, master, let us follow the old woman's advice; let us start, and
run without looking behind us."

Candide shed tears.

"Oh! my dear Cunegonde! must I leave you just at a time when the
Governor was going to sanction our nuptials? Cunegonde, brought to such
a distance what will become of you?"

"She will do as well as she can," said Cacambo; "the women are never at
a loss, God provides for them, let us run."

"Whither art thou carrying me? Where shall we go? What shall we do
without Cunegonde?" said Candide.

"By St. James of Compostella," said Cacambo, "you were going to fight
against the Jesuits; let us go to fight for them; I know the road well,
I'll conduct you to their kingdom, where they will be charmed to have a
captain that understands the Bulgarian exercise. You'll make a
prodigious fortune; if we cannot find our account in one world we shall
in another. It is a great pleasure to see and do new things."

"You have before been in Paraguay, then?" said Candide.

"Ay, sure," answered Cacambo, "I was servant in the College of the
Assumption, and am acquainted with the government of the good Fathers as
well as I am with the streets of Cadiz. It is an admirable government.
The kingdom is upwards of three hundred leagues in diameter, and divided
into thirty provinces; there the Fathers possess all, and the people
nothing; it is a masterpiece of reason and justice. For my part I see
nothing so divine as the Fathers who here make war upon the kings of
Spain and Portugal, and in Europe confess those kings; who here kill
Spaniards, and in Madrid send them to heaven; this delights me, let us
push forward. You are going to be the happiest of mortals. What pleasure
will it be to those Fathers to hear that a captain who knows the
Bulgarian exercise has come to them!"

As soon as they reached the first barrier, Cacambo told the advanced
guard that a captain wanted to speak with my lord the Commandant. Notice
was given to the main guard, and immediately a Paraguayan officer ran
and laid himself at the feet of the Commandant, to impart this news to
him. Candide and Cacambo were disarmed, and their two Andalusian horses
seized. The strangers were introduced between two files of musketeers;
the Commandant was at the further end, with the three-cornered cap on
his head, his gown tucked up, a sword by his side, and a spontoon[15] in
his hand. He beckoned, and straightway the new-comers were encompassed
by four-and-twenty soldiers. A sergeant told them they must wait, that
the Commandant could not speak to them, and that the reverend Father
Provincial does not suffer any Spaniard to open his mouth but in his
presence, or to stay above three hours in the province.

"And where is the reverend Father Provincial?" said Cacambo.

"He is upon the parade just after celebrating mass," answered the
sergeant, "and you cannot kiss his spurs till three hours hence."

"However," said Cacambo, "the captain is not a Spaniard, but a German,
he is ready to perish with hunger as well as myself; cannot we have
something for breakfast, while we wait for his reverence?"

The sergeant went immediately to acquaint the Commandant with what he
had heard.

"God be praised!" said the reverend Commandant, "since he is a German, I
may speak to him; take him to my arbour."

Candide was at once conducted to a beautiful summer-house, ornamented
with a very pretty colonnade of green and gold marble, and with
trellises, enclosing parraquets, humming-birds, fly-birds, guinea-hens,
and all other rare birds. An excellent breakfast was provided in vessels
of gold; and while the Paraguayans were eating maize out of wooden
dishes, in the open fields and exposed to the heat of the sun, the
reverend Father Commandant retired to his arbour.

He was a very handsome young man, with a full face, white skin but high
in colour; he had an arched eyebrow, a lively eye, red ears, vermilion
lips, a bold air, but such a boldness as neither belonged to a Spaniard
nor a Jesuit. They returned their arms to Candide and Cacambo, and also
the two Andalusian horses; to whom Cacambo gave some oats to eat just by
the arbour, having an eye upon them all the while for fear of a
surprise.

Candide first kissed the hem of the Commandant's robe, then they sat
down to table.

"You are, then, a German?" said the Jesuit to him in that language.

"Yes, reverend Father," answered Candide.

As they pronounced these words they looked at each other with great
amazement, and with such an emotion as they could not conceal.

"And from what part of Germany do you come?" said the Jesuit.

"I am from the dirty province of Westphalia," answered Candide; "I was
born in the Castle of Thunder-ten-Tronckh."

"Oh! Heavens! is it possible?" cried the Commandant.

"What a miracle!" cried Candide.

"Is it really you?" said the Commandant.

"It is not possible!" said Candide.

They drew back; they embraced; they shed rivulets of tears.

"What, is it you, reverend Father? You, the brother of the fair
Cunegonde! You, that was slain by the Bulgarians! You, the Baron's son!
You, a Jesuit in Paraguay! I must confess this is a strange world that
we live in. Oh, Pangloss! Pangloss! how glad you would be if you had not
been hanged!"

The Commandant sent away the negro slaves and the Paraguayans, who
served them with liquors in goblets of rock-crystal. He thanked God and
St. Ignatius a thousand times; he clasped Candide in his arms; and their
faces were all bathed with tears.

"You will be more surprised, more affected, and transported," said
Candide, "when I tell you that Cunegonde, your sister, whom you believe
to have been ripped open, is in perfect health."

"Where?"

"In your neighbourhood, with the Governor of Buenos Ayres; and I was
going to fight against you."

Every word which they uttered in this long conversation but added wonder
to wonder. Their souls fluttered on their tongues, listened in their
ears, and sparkled in their eyes. As they were Germans, they sat a good
while at table, waiting for the reverend Father Provincial, and the
Commandant spoke to his dear Candide as follows.




XV

HOW CANDIDE KILLED THE BROTHER OF HIS DEAR CUNEGONDE.


"I shall have ever present to my memory the dreadful day, on which I saw
my father and mother killed, and my sister ravished. When the Bulgarians
retired, my dear sister could not be found; but my mother, my father,
and myself, with two maid-servants and three little boys all of whom had
been slain, were put in a hearse, to be conveyed for interment to a
chapel belonging to the Jesuits, within two leagues of our family seat.
A Jesuit sprinkled us with some holy water; it was horribly salt; a few
drops of it fell into my eyes; the father perceived that my eyelids
stirred a little; he put his hand upon my heart and felt it beat. I
received assistance, and at the end of three weeks I recovered. You
know, my dear Candide, I was very pretty; but I grew much prettier, and
the reverend Father Didrie,[16] Superior of that House, conceived the
tenderest friendship for me; he gave me the habit of the order, some
years after I was sent to Rome. The Father-General needed new levies of
young German-Jesuits. The sovereigns of Paraguay admit as few Spanish
Jesuits as possible; they prefer those of other nations as being more
subordinate to their commands. I was judged fit by the reverend
Father-General to go and work in this vineyard. We set out--a Pole, a
Tyrolese, and myself. Upon my arrival I was honoured with a
sub-deaconship and a lieutenancy. I am to-day colonel and priest. We
shall give a warm reception to the King of Spain's troops; I will answer
for it that they shall be excommunicated and well beaten. Providence
sends you here to assist us. But is it, indeed, true that my dear sister
Cunegonde is in the neighbourhood, with the Governor of Buenos Ayres?"

Candide assured him on oath that nothing was more true, and their tears
began afresh.

The Baron could not refrain from embracing Candide; he called him his
brother, his saviour.

"Ah! perhaps," said he, "we shall together, my dear Candide, enter the
town as conquerors, and recover my sister Cunegonde."

"That is all I want," said Candide, "for I intended to marry her, and I
still hope to do so."

"You insolent!" replied the Baron, "would you have the impudence to
marry my sister who has seventy-two quarterings! I find thou hast the
most consummate effrontery to dare to mention so presumptuous a design!"

Candide, petrified at this speech, made answer:

"Reverend Father, all the quarterings in the world signify nothing; I
rescued your sister from the arms of a Jew and of an Inquisitor; she has
great obligations to me, she wishes to marry me; Master Pangloss always
told me that all men are equal, and certainly I will marry her."

"We shall see that, thou scoundrel!" said the Jesuit Baron de
Thunder-ten-Tronckh, and that instant struck him across the face with
the flat of his sword. Candide in an instant drew his rapier, and
plunged it up to the hilt in the Jesuit's belly; but in pulling it out
reeking hot, he burst into tears.

"Good God!" said he, "I have killed my old master, my friend, my
brother-in-law! I am the best-natured creature in the world, and yet I
have already killed three men, and of these three two were priests."

Cacambo, who stood sentry by the door of the arbour, ran to him.

"We have nothing more for it than to sell our lives as dearly as we
can," said his master to him, "without doubt some one will soon enter
the arbour, and we must die sword in hand."

Cacambo, who had been in a great many scrapes in his lifetime, did not
lose his head; he took the Baron's Jesuit habit, put it on Candide, gave
him the square cap, and made him mount on horseback. All this was done
in the twinkling of an eye.

"Let us gallop fast, master, everybody will take you for a Jesuit, going
to give directions to your men, and we shall have passed the frontiers
before they will be able to overtake us."

He flew as he spoke these words, crying out aloud in Spanish:

"Make way, make way, for the reverend Father Colonel."




XVI

ADVENTURES OF THE TWO TRAVELLERS, WITH TWO GIRLS, TWO MONKEYS, AND THE
SAVAGES CALLED OREILLONS.


Candide and his valet had got beyond the barrier, before it was known in
the camp that the German Jesuit was dead. The wary Cacambo had taken
care to fill his wallet with bread, chocolate, bacon, fruit, and a few
bottles of wine. With their Andalusian horses they penetrated into an
unknown country, where they perceived no beaten track. At length they
came to a beautiful meadow intersected with purling rills. Here our two
adventurers fed their horses. Cacambo proposed to his master to take
some food, and he set him an example.

"How can you ask me to eat ham," said Candide, "after killing the
Baron's son, and being doomed never more to see the beautiful Cunegonde?
What will it avail me to spin out my wretched days and drag them far
from her in remorse and despair? And what will the _Journal of
Trevoux_[17] say?"

While he was thus lamenting his fate, he went on eating. The sun went
down. The two wanderers heard some little cries which seemed to be
uttered by women. They did not know whether they were cries of pain or
joy; but they started up precipitately with that inquietude and alarm
which every little thing inspires in an unknown country. The noise was
made by two naked girls, who tripped along the mead, while two monkeys
were pursuing them and biting their buttocks. Candide was moved with
pity; he had learned to fire a gun in the Bulgarian service, and he was
so clever at it, that he could hit a filbert in a hedge without touching
a leaf of the tree. He took up his double-barrelled Spanish fusil, let
it off, and killed the two monkeys.

"God be praised! My dear Cacambo, I have rescued those two poor
creatures from a most perilous situation. If I have committed a sin in
killing an Inquisitor and a Jesuit, I have made ample amends by saving
the lives of these girls. Perhaps they are young ladies of family; and
this adventure may procure us great advantages in this country."

He was continuing, but stopped short when he saw the two girls tenderly
embracing the monkeys, bathing their bodies in tears, and rending the
air with the most dismal lamentations.

"Little did I expect to see such good-nature," said he at length to
Cacambo; who made answer:

"Master, you have done a fine thing now; you have slain the sweethearts
of those two young ladies."

"The sweethearts! Is it possible? You are jesting, Cacambo, I can never
believe it!"

"Dear master," replied Cacambo; "you are surprised at everything. Why
should you think it so strange that in some countries there are monkeys
which insinuate themselves into the good graces of the ladies; they are
a fourth part human, as I am a fourth part Spaniard."

"Alas!" replied Candide, "I remember to have heard Master Pangloss say,
that formerly such accidents used to happen; that these mixtures were
productive of Centaurs, Fauns, and Satyrs; and that many of the ancients
had seen such monsters, but I looked upon the whole as fabulous."

"You ought now to be convinced," said Cacambo, "that it is the truth,
and you see what use is made of those creatures, by persons that have
not had a proper education; all I fear is that those ladies will play us
some ugly trick."

These sound reflections induced Candide to leave the meadow and to
plunge into a wood. He supped there with Cacambo; and after cursing the
Portuguese inquisitor, the Governor of Buenos Ayres, and the Baron, they
fell asleep on moss. On awaking they felt that they could not move; for
during the night the Oreillons, who inhabited that country, and to whom
the ladies had denounced them, had bound them with cords made of the
bark of trees. They were encompassed by fifty naked Oreillons, armed
with bows and arrows, with clubs and flint hatchets. Some were making a
large cauldron boil, others were preparing spits, and all cried:

"A Jesuit! a Jesuit! we shall be revenged, we shall have excellent
cheer, let us eat the Jesuit, let us eat him up!"

"I told you, my dear master," cried Cacambo sadly, "that those two girls
would play us some ugly trick."

Candide seeing the cauldron and the spits, cried:

"We are certainly going to be either roasted or boiled. Ah! what would
Master Pangloss say, were he to see how pure nature is formed?
Everything is right, may be, but I declare it is very hard to have lost
Miss Cunegonde and to be put upon a spit by Oreillons."

Cacambo never lost his head.

"Do not despair," said he to the disconsolate Candide, "I understand a
little of the jargon of these people, I will speak to them."

"Be sure," said Candide, "to represent to them how frightfully inhuman
it is to cook men, and how very un-Christian."

"Gentlemen," said Cacambo, "you reckon you are to-day going to feast
upon a Jesuit. It is all very well, nothing is more unjust than thus to
treat your enemies. Indeed, the law of nature teaches us to kill our
neighbour, and such is the practice all over the world. If we do not
accustom ourselves to eating them, it is because we have better fare.
But you have not the same resources as we; certainly it is much better
to devour your enemies than to resign to the crows and rooks the fruits
of your victory. But, gentlemen, surely you would not choose to eat your
friends. You believe that you are going to spit a Jesuit, and he is your
defender. It is the enemy of your enemies that you are going to roast.
As for myself, I was born in your country; this gentleman is my master,
and, far from being a Jesuit, he has just killed one, whose spoils he
wears; and thence comes your mistake. To convince you of the truth of
what I say, take his habit and carry it to the first barrier of the
Jesuit kingdom, and inform yourselves whether my master did not kill a
Jesuit officer. It will not take you long, and you can always eat us if
you find that I have lied to you. But I have told you the truth. You are
too well acquainted with the principles of public law, humanity, and
justice not to pardon us."

The Oreillons found this speech very reasonable. They deputed two of
their principal people with all expedition to inquire into the truth of
the matter; these executed their commission like men of sense, and soon
returned with good news. The Oreillons untied their prisoners, showed
them all sorts of civilities, offered them girls, gave them refreshment,
and reconducted them to the confines of their territories, proclaiming
with great joy:

"He is no Jesuit! He is no Jesuit!"

Candide could not help being surprised at the cause of his deliverance.

"What people!" said he; "what men! what manners! If I had not been so
lucky as to run Miss Cunegonde's brother through the body, I should have
been devoured without redemption. But, after all, pure nature is good,
since these people, instead of feasting upon my flesh, have shown me a
thousand civilities, when then I was not a Jesuit."




XVII

ARRIVAL OF CANDIDE AND HIS VALET AT EL DORADO, AND WHAT THEY SAW THERE.


"You see," said Cacambo to Candide, as soon as they had reached the
frontiers of the Oreillons, "that this hemisphere is not better than the
others, take my word for it; let us go back to Europe by the shortest
way."

"How go back?" said Candide, "and where shall we go? to my own country?
The Bulgarians and the Abares are slaying all; to Portugal? there I
shall be burnt; and if we abide here we are every moment in danger of
being spitted. But how can I resolve to quit a part of the world where
my dear Cunegonde resides?"

"Let us turn towards Cayenne," said Cacambo, "there we shall find
Frenchmen, who wander all over the world; they may assist us; God will
perhaps have pity on us."

It was not easy to get to Cayenne; they knew vaguely in which direction
to go, but rivers, precipices, robbers, savages, obstructed them all the
way. Their horses died of fatigue. Their provisions were consumed; they
fed a whole month upon wild fruits, and found themselves at last near a
little river bordered with cocoa trees, which sustained their lives and
their hopes.

Cacambo, who was as good a counsellor as the old woman, said to Candide:

"We are able to hold out no longer; we have walked enough. I see an
empty canoe near the river-side; let us fill it with cocoanuts, throw
ourselves into it, and go with the current; a river always leads to some
inhabited spot. If we do not find pleasant things we shall at least find
new things."

"With all my heart," said Candide, "let us recommend ourselves to
Providence."

They rowed a few leagues, between banks, in some places flowery, in
others barren; in some parts smooth, in others rugged. The stream ever
widened, and at length lost itself under an arch of frightful rocks
which reached to the sky. The two travellers had the courage to commit
themselves to the current. The river, suddenly contracting at this
place, whirled them along with a dreadful noise and rapidity. At the end
of four-and-twenty hours they saw daylight again, but their canoe was
dashed to pieces against the rocks. For a league they had to creep from
rock to rock, until at length they discovered an extensive plain,
bounded by inaccessible mountains. The country was cultivated as much
for pleasure as for necessity. On all sides the useful was also the
beautiful. The roads were covered, or rather adorned, with carriages of
a glittering form and substance, in which were men and women of
surprising beauty, drawn by large red sheep which surpassed in fleetness
the finest coursers of Andalusia, Tetuan, and Mequinez.[18]

"Here, however, is a country," said Candide, "which is better than
Westphalia."

He stepped out with Cacambo towards the first village which he saw. Some
children dressed in tattered brocades played at quoits on the outskirts.
Our travellers from the other world amused themselves by looking on. The
quoits were large round pieces, yellow, red, and green, which cast a
singular lustre! The travellers picked a few of them off the ground;
this was of gold, that of emeralds, the other of rubies--the least of
them would have been the greatest ornament on the Mogul's throne.

"Without doubt," said Cacambo, "these children must be the king's sons
that are playing at quoits!"

The village schoolmaster appeared at this moment and called them to
school.

"There," said Candide, "is the preceptor of the royal family."

The little truants immediately quitted their game, leaving the quoits
on the ground with all their other playthings. Candide gathered them up,
ran to the master, and presented them to him in a most humble manner,
giving him to understand by signs that their royal highnesses had
forgotten their gold and jewels. The schoolmaster, smiling, flung them
upon the ground; then, looking at Candide with a good deal of surprise,
went about his business.

The travellers, however, took care to gather up the gold, the rubies,
and the emeralds.

"Where are we?" cried Candide. "The king's children in this country must
be well brought up, since they are taught to despise gold and precious
stones."

Cacambo was as much surprised as Candide. At length they drew near the
first house in the village. It was built like an European palace. A
crowd of people pressed about the door, and there were still more in the
house. They heard most agreeable music, and were aware of a delicious
odour of cooking. Cacambo went up to the door and heard they were
talking Peruvian; it was his mother tongue, for it is well known that
Cacambo was born in Tucuman, in a village where no other language was
spoken.

"I will be your interpreter here," said he to Candide; "let us go in, it
is a public-house."

Immediately two waiters and two girls, dressed in cloth of gold, and
their hair tied up with ribbons, invited them to sit down to table with
the landlord. They served four dishes of soup, each garnished with two
young parrots; a boiled condor[19] which weighed two hundred pounds; two
roasted monkeys, of excellent flavour; three hundred humming-birds in
one dish, and six hundred fly-birds in another; exquisite ragouts;
delicious pastries; the whole served up in dishes of a kind of
rock-crystal. The waiters and girls poured out several liqueurs drawn
from the sugar-cane.

Most of the company were chapmen and waggoners, all extremely polite;
they asked Cacambo a few questions with the greatest circumspection, and
answered his in the most obliging manner.

As soon as dinner was over, Cacambo believed as well as Candide that
they might well pay their reckoning by laying down two of those large
gold pieces which they had picked up. The landlord and landlady shouted
with laughter and held their sides. When the fit was over:

"Gentlemen," said the landlord, "it is plain you are strangers, and such
guests we are not accustomed to see; pardon us therefore for laughing
when you offered us the pebbles from our highroads in payment of your
reckoning. You doubtless have not the money of the country; but it is
not necessary to have any money at all to dine in this house. All
hostelries established for the convenience of commerce are paid by the
government. You have fared but very indifferently because this is a poor
village; but everywhere else, you will be received as you deserve."

Cacambo explained this whole discourse with great astonishment to
Candide, who was as greatly astonished to hear it.

"What sort of a country then is this," said they to one another; "a
country unknown to all the rest of the world, and where nature is of a
kind so different from ours? It is probably the country where all is
well; for there absolutely must be one such place. And, whatever Master
Pangloss might say, I often found that things went very ill in
Westphalia."




XVIII

WHAT THEY SAW IN THE COUNTRY OF EL DORADO.


Cacambo expressed his curiosity to the landlord, who made answer:

"I am very ignorant, but not the worse on that account. However, we have
in this neighbourhood an old man retired from Court who is the most
learned and most communicative person in the kingdom."

At once he took Cacambo to the old man. Candide acted now only a second
character, and accompanied his valet. They entered a very plain house,
for the door was only of silver, and the ceilings were only of gold, but
wrought in so elegant a taste as to vie with the richest. The
antechamber, indeed, was only encrusted with rubies and emeralds, but
the order in which everything was arranged made amends for this great
simplicity.

The old man received the strangers on his sofa, which was stuffed with
humming-birds' feathers, and ordered his servants to present them with
liqueurs in diamond goblets; after which he satisfied their curiosity
in the following terms:

"I am now one hundred and seventy-two years old, and I learnt of my late
father, Master of the Horse to the King, the amazing revolutions of
Peru, of which he had been an eyewitness. The kingdom we now inhabit is
the ancient country of the Incas, who quitted it very imprudently to
conquer another part of the world, and were at length destroyed by the
Spaniards.

"More wise by far were the princes of their family, who remained in
their native country; and they ordained, with the consent of the whole
nation, that none of the inhabitants should ever be permitted to quit
this little kingdom; and this has preserved our innocence and happiness.
The Spaniards have had a confused notion of this country, and have
called it _El Dorado_; and an Englishman, whose name was Sir Walter
Raleigh, came very near it about a hundred years ago; but being
surrounded by inaccessible rocks and precipices, we have hitherto been
sheltered from the rapaciousness of European nations, who have an
inconceivable passion for the pebbles and dirt of our land, for the sake
of which they would murder us to the last man."

The conversation was long: it turned chiefly on their form of
government, their manners, their women, their public entertainments,
and the arts. At length Candide, having always had a taste for
metaphysics, made Cacambo ask whether there was any religion in that
country.

The old man reddened a little.

"How then," said he, "can you doubt it? Do you take us for ungrateful
wretches?"

Cacambo humbly asked, "What was the religion in El Dorado?"

The old man reddened again.

"Can there be two religions?" said he. "We have, I believe, the religion
of all the world: we worship God night and morning."

"Do you worship but one God?" said Cacambo, who still acted as
interpreter in representing Candide's doubts.

"Surely," said the old man, "there are not two, nor three, nor four. I
must confess the people from your side of the world ask very
extraordinary questions."

Candide was not yet tired of interrogating the good old man; he wanted
to know in what manner they prayed to God in El Dorado.

"We do not pray to Him," said the worthy sage; "we have nothing to ask
of Him; He has given us all we need, and we return Him thanks without
ceasing."

Candide having a curiosity to see the priests asked where they were.
The good old man smiled.

"My friend," said he, "we are all priests. The King and all the heads of
families sing solemn canticles of thanksgiving every morning,
accompanied by five or six thousand musicians."

"What! have you no monks who teach, who dispute, who govern, who cabal,
and who burn people that are not of their opinion?"

"We must be mad, indeed, if that were the case," said the old man; "here
we are all of one opinion, and we know not what you mean by monks."

During this whole discourse Candide was in raptures, and he said to
himself:

"This is vastly different from Westphalia and the Baron's castle. Had
our friend Pangloss seen El Dorado he would no longer have said that the
castle of Thunder-ten-Tronckh was the finest upon earth. It is evident
that one must travel."

After this long conversation the old man ordered a coach and six sheep
to be got ready, and twelve of his domestics to conduct the travellers
to Court.

"Excuse me," said he, "if my age deprives me of the honour of
accompanying you. The King will receive you in a manner that cannot
displease you; and no doubt you will make an allowance for the customs
of the country, if some things should not be to your liking."

Candide and Cacambo got into the coach, the six sheep flew, and in less
than four hours they reached the King's palace situated at the extremity
of the capital. The portal was two hundred and twenty feet high, and one
hundred wide; but words are wanting to express the materials of which it
was built. It is plain such materials must have prodigious superiority
over those pebbles and sand which we call gold and precious stones.

Twenty beautiful damsels of the King's guard received Candide and
Cacambo as they alighted from the coach, conducted them to the bath, and
dressed them in robes woven of the down of humming-birds; after which
the great crown officers, of both sexes, led them to the King's
apartment, between two files of musicians, a thousand on each side. When
they drew near to the audience chamber Cacambo asked one of the great
officers in what way he should pay his obeisance to his Majesty; whether
they should throw themselves upon their knees or on their stomachs;
whether they should put their hands upon their heads or behind their
backs; whether they should lick the dust off the floor; in a word, what
was the ceremony?

"The custom," said the great officer, "is to embrace the King, and to
kiss him on each cheek."

Candide and Cacambo threw themselves round his Majesty's neck. He
received them with all the goodness imaginable, and politely invited
them to supper.

While waiting they were shown the city, and saw the public edifices
raised as high as the clouds, the market places ornamented with a
thousand columns, the fountains of spring water, those of rose water,
those of liqueurs drawn from sugar-cane, incessantly flowing into the
great squares, which were paved with a kind of precious stone, which
gave off a delicious fragrancy like that of cloves and cinnamon. Candide
asked to see the court of justice, the parliament. They told him they
had none, and that they were strangers to lawsuits. He asked if they had
any prisons, and they answered no. But what surprised him most and gave
him the greatest pleasure was the palace of sciences, where he saw a
gallery two thousand feet long, and filled with instruments employed in
mathematics and physics.

After rambling about the city the whole afternoon, and seeing but a
thousandth part of it, they were reconducted to the royal palace, where
Candide sat down to table with his Majesty, his valet Cacambo, and
several ladies. Never was there a better entertainment, and never was
more wit shown at a table than that which fell from his Majesty. Cacambo
explained the King's _bon-mots_ to Candide, and notwithstanding they
were translated they still appeared to be _bon-mots_. Of all the things
that surprised Candide this was not the least.

They spent a month in this hospitable place. Candide frequently said to
Cacambo:

"I own, my friend, once more that the castle where I was born is nothing
in comparison with this; but, after all, Miss Cunegonde is not here, and
you have, without doubt, some mistress in Europe. If we abide here we
shall only be upon a footing with the rest, whereas, if we return to our
old world, only with twelve sheep laden with the pebbles of El Dorado,
we shall be richer than all the kings in Europe. We shall have no more
Inquisitors to fear, and we may easily recover Miss Cunegonde."

This speech was agreeable to Cacambo; mankind are so fond of roving, of
making a figure in their own country, and of boasting of what they have
seen in their travels, that the two happy ones resolved to be no longer
so, but to ask his Majesty's leave to quit the country.

"You are foolish," said the King. "I am sensible that my kingdom is but
a small place, but when a person is comfortably settled in any part he
should abide there. I have not the right to detain strangers. It is a
tyranny which neither our manners nor our laws permit. All men are free.
Go when you wish, but the going will be very difficult. It is impossible
to ascend that rapid river on which you came as by a miracle, and which
runs under vaulted rocks. The mountains which surround my kingdom are
ten thousand feet high, and as steep as walls; they are each over ten
leagues in breadth, and there is no other way to descend them than by
precipices. However, since you absolutely wish to depart, I shall give
orders to my engineers to construct a machine that will convey you very
safely. When we have conducted you over the mountains no one can
accompany you further, for my subjects have made a vow never to quit the
kingdom, and they are too wise to break it. Ask me besides anything that
you please."

"We desire nothing of your Majesty," says Candide, "but a few sheep
laden with provisions, pebbles, and the earth of this country."

The King laughed.

"I cannot conceive," said he, "what pleasure you Europeans find in our
yellow clay, but take as much as you like, and great good may it do
you."

At once he gave directions that his engineers should construct a machine
to hoist up these two extraordinary men out of the kingdom. Three
thousand good mathematicians went to work; it was ready in fifteen days,
and did not cost more than twenty million sterling in the specie of that
country. They placed Candide and Cacambo on the machine. There were two
great red sheep saddled and bridled to ride upon as soon as they were
beyond the mountains, twenty pack-sheep laden with provisions, thirty
with presents of the curiosities of the country, and fifty with gold,
diamonds, and precious stones. The King embraced the two wanderers very
tenderly.

Their departure, with the ingenious manner in which they and their sheep
were hoisted over the mountains, was a splendid spectacle. The
mathematicians took their leave after conveying them to a place of
safety, and Candide had no other desire, no other aim, than to present
his sheep to Miss Cunegonde.

"Now," said he, "we are able to pay the Governor of Buenos Ayres if Miss
Cunegonde can be ransomed. Let us journey towards Cayenne. Let us
embark, and we will afterwards see what kingdom we shall be able to
purchase."




XIX

WHAT HAPPENED TO THEM AT SURINAM AND HOW CANDIDE GOT ACQUAINTED WITH
MARTIN.


Our travellers spent the first day very agreeably. They were delighted
with possessing more treasure than all Asia, Europe, and Africa could
scrape together. Candide, in his raptures, cut Cunegonde's name on the
trees. The second day two of their sheep plunged into a morass, where
they and their burdens were lost; two more died of fatigue a few days
after; seven or eight perished with hunger in a desert; and others
subsequently fell down precipices. At length, after travelling a hundred
days, only two sheep remained. Said Candide to Cacambo:

"My friend, you see how perishable are the riches of this world; there
is nothing solid but virtue, and the happiness of seeing Cunegonde once
more."

"I grant all you say," said Cacambo, "but we have still two sheep
remaining, with more treasure than the King of Spain will ever have; and
I see a town which I take to be Surinam, belonging to the Dutch. We are
at the end of all our troubles, and at the beginning of happiness."

As they drew near the town, they saw a negro stretched upon the ground,
with only one moiety of his clothes, that is, of his blue linen drawers;
the poor man had lost his left leg and his right hand.

"Good God!" said Candide in Dutch, "what art thou doing there, friend,
in that shocking condition?"

"I am waiting for my master, Mynheer Vanderdendur, the famous merchant,"
answered the negro.

"Was it Mynheer Vanderdendur," said Candide, "that treated thee thus?"

"Yes, sir," said the negro, "it is the custom. They give us a pair of
linen drawers for our whole garment twice a year. When we work at the
sugar-canes, and the mill snatches hold of a finger, they cut off the
hand; and when we attempt to run away, they cut off the leg; both cases
have happened to me. This is the price at which you eat sugar in Europe.
Yet when my mother sold me for ten patagons[20] on the coast of Guinea,
she said to me: 'My dear child, bless our fetiches, adore them for ever;
they will make thee live happily; thou hast the honour of being the
slave of our lords, the whites, which is making the fortune of thy
father and mother.' Alas! I know not whether I have made their fortunes;
this I know, that they have not made mine. Dogs, monkeys, and parrots
are a thousand times less wretched than I. The Dutch fetiches, who have
converted me, declare every Sunday that we are all of us children of
Adam--blacks as well as whites. I am not a genealogist, but if these
preachers tell truth, we are all second cousins. Now, you must agree,
that it is impossible to treat one's relations in a more barbarous
manner."

"Oh, Pangloss!" cried Candide, "thou hadst not guessed at this
abomination; it is the end. I must at last renounce thy optimism."

"What is this optimism?" said Cacambo.

"Alas!" said Candide, "it is the madness of maintaining that everything
is right when it is wrong."

Looking at the negro, he shed tears, and weeping, he entered Surinam.

The first thing they inquired after was whether there was a vessel in
the harbour which could be sent to Buenos Ayres. The person to whom they
applied was a Spanish sea-captain, who offered to agree with them upon
reasonable terms. He appointed to meet them at a public-house, whither
Candide and the faithful Cacambo went with their two sheep, and awaited
his coming.

Candide, who had his heart upon his lips, told the Spaniard all his
adventures, and avowed that he intended to elope with Miss Cunegonde.

"Then I will take good care not to carry you to Buenos Ayres," said the
seaman. "I should be hanged, and so would you. The fair Cunegonde is my
lord's favourite mistress."

This was a thunderclap for Candide: he wept for a long while. At last he
drew Cacambo aside.

"Here, my dear friend," said he to him, "this thou must do. We have,
each of us in his pocket, five or six millions in diamonds; you are more
clever than I; you must go and bring Miss Cunegonde from Buenos Ayres.
If the Governor makes any difficulty, give him a million; if he will not
relinquish her, give him two; as you have not killed an Inquisitor, they
will have no suspicion of you; I'll get another ship, and go and wait
for you at Venice; that's a free country, where there is no danger
either from Bulgarians, Abares, Jews, or Inquisitors."

Cacambo applauded this wise resolution. He despaired at parting from so
good a master, who had become his intimate friend; but the pleasure of
serving him prevailed over the pain of leaving him. They embraced with
tears; Candide charged him not to forget the good old woman. Cacambo
set out that very same day. This Cacambo was a very honest fellow.

Candide stayed some time longer in Surinam, waiting for another captain
to carry him and the two remaining sheep to Italy. After he had hired
domestics, and purchased everything necessary for a long voyage, Mynheer
Vanderdendur, captain of a large vessel, came and offered his services.

"How much will you charge," said he to this man, "to carry me straight
to Venice--me, my servants, my baggage, and these two sheep?"

The skipper asked ten thousand piastres. Candide did not hesitate.

"Oh! oh!" said the prudent Vanderdendur to himself, "this stranger gives
ten thousand piastres unhesitatingly! He must be very rich."

Returning a little while after, he let him know that upon second
consideration, he could not undertake the voyage for less than twenty
thousand piastres.

"Well, you shall have them," said Candide.

"Ay!" said the skipper to himself, "this man agrees to pay twenty
thousand piastres with as much ease as ten."

He went back to him again, and declared that he could not carry him to
Venice for less than thirty thousand piastres.

"Then you shall have thirty thousand," replied Candide.

"Oh! oh!" said the Dutch skipper once more to himself, "thirty thousand
piastres are a trifle to this man; surely these sheep must be laden with
an immense treasure; let us say no more about it. First of all, let him
pay down the thirty thousand piastres; then we shall see."

Candide sold two small diamonds, the least of which was worth more than
what the skipper asked for his freight. He paid him in advance. The two
sheep were put on board. Candide followed in a little boat to join the
vessel in the roads. The skipper seized his opportunity, set sail, and
put out to sea, the wind favouring him. Candide, dismayed and stupefied,
soon lost sight of the vessel.

"Alas!" said he, "this is a trick worthy of the old world!"

He put back, overwhelmed with sorrow, for indeed he had lost sufficient
to make the fortune of twenty monarchs. He waited upon the Dutch
magistrate, and in his distress he knocked over loudly at the door. He
entered and told his adventure, raising his voice with unnecessary
vehemence. The magistrate began by fining him ten thousand piastres for
making a noise; then he listened patiently, promised to examine into his
affair at the skipper's return, and ordered him to pay ten thousand
piastres for the expense of the hearing.

This drove Candide to despair; he had, indeed, endured misfortunes a
thousand times worse; the coolness of the magistrate and of the skipper
who had robbed him, roused his choler and flung him into a deep
melancholy. The villainy of mankind presented itself before his
imagination in all its deformity, and his mind was filled with gloomy
ideas. At length hearing that a French vessel was ready to set sail for
Bordeaux, as he had no sheep laden with diamonds to take along with him
he hired a cabin at the usual price. He made it known in the town that
he would pay the passage and board and give two thousand piastres to any
honest man who would make the voyage with him, upon condition that this
man was the most dissatisfied with his state, and the most unfortunate
in the whole province.

Such a crowd of candidates presented themselves that a fleet of ships
could hardly have held them. Candide being desirous of selecting from
among the best, marked out about one-twentieth of them who seemed to be
sociable men, and who all pretended to merit his preference. He
assembled them at his inn, and gave them a supper on condition that each
took an oath to relate his history faithfully, promising to choose him
who appeared to be most justly discontented with his state, and to
bestow some presents upon the rest.

They sat until four o'clock in the morning. Candide, in listening to all
their adventures, was reminded of what the old woman had said to him in
their voyage to Buenos Ayres, and of her wager that there was not a
person on board the ship but had met with very great misfortunes. He
dreamed of Pangloss at every adventure told to him.

"This Pangloss," said he, "would be puzzled to demonstrate his system. I
wish that he were here. Certainly, if all things are good, it is in El
Dorado and not in the rest of the world."

At length he made choice of a poor man of letters, who had worked ten
years for the booksellers of Amsterdam. He judged that there was not in
the whole world a trade which could disgust one more.

This philosopher was an honest man; but he had been robbed by his wife,
beaten by his son, and abandoned by his daughter who got a Portuguese to
run away with her. He had just been deprived of a small employment, on
which he subsisted; and he was persecuted by the preachers of Surinam,
who took him for a Socinian. We must allow that the others were at least
as wretched as he; but Candide hoped that the philosopher would
entertain him during the voyage. All the other candidates complained
that Candide had done them great injustice; but he appeased them by
giving one hundred piastres to each.




XX

WHAT HAPPENED AT SEA TO CANDIDE AND MARTIN.


The old philosopher, whose name was Martin, embarked then with Candide
for Bordeaux. They had both seen and suffered a great deal; and if the
vessel had sailed from Surinam to Japan, by the Cape of Good Hope, the
subject of moral and natural evil would have enabled them to entertain
one another during the whole voyage.

Candide, however, had one great advantage over Martin, in that he always
hoped to see Miss Cunegonde; whereas Martin had nothing at all to hope.
Besides, Candide was possessed of money and jewels, and though he had
lost one hundred large red sheep, laden with the greatest treasure upon
earth; though the knavery of the Dutch skipper still sat heavy upon his
mind; yet when he reflected upon what he had still left, and when he
mentioned the name of Cunegonde, especially towards the latter end of a
repast, he inclined to Pangloss's doctrine.

"But you, Mr. Martin," said he to the philosopher, "what do you think
of all this? what are your ideas on moral and natural evil?"

"Sir," answered Martin, "our priests accused me of being a Socinian, but
the real fact is I am a Manichean."[21]

"You jest," said Candide; "there are no longer Manicheans in the world."

"I am one," said Martin. "I cannot help it; I know not how to think
otherwise."

"Surely you must be possessed by the devil," said Candide.

"He is so deeply concerned in the affairs of this world," answered
Martin, "that he may very well be in me, as well as in everybody else;
but I own to you that when I cast an eye on this globe, or rather on
this little ball, I cannot help thinking that God has abandoned it to
some malignant being. I except, always, El Dorado. I scarcely ever knew
a city that did not desire the destruction of a neighbouring city, nor a
family that did not wish to exterminate some other family. Everywhere
the weak execrate the powerful, before whom they cringe; and the
powerful beat them like sheep whose wool and flesh they sell. A million
regimented assassins, from one extremity of Europe to the other, get
their bread by disciplined depredation and murder, for want of more
honest employment. Even in those cities which seem to enjoy peace, and
where the arts flourish, the inhabitants are devoured by more envy,
care, and uneasiness than are experienced by a besieged town. Secret
griefs are more cruel than public calamities. In a word I have seen so
much, and experienced so much that I am a Manichean."

"There are, however, some things good," said Candide.

"That may be," said Martin; "but I know them not."

In the middle of this dispute they heard the report of cannon; it
redoubled every instant. Each took out his glass. They saw two ships in
close fight about three miles off. The wind brought both so near to the
French vessel that our travellers had the pleasure of seeing the fight
at their ease. At length one let off a broadside, so low and so truly
aimed, that the other sank to the bottom. Candide and Martin could
plainly perceive a hundred men on the deck of the sinking vessel; they
raised their hands to heaven and uttered terrible outcries, and the next
moment were swallowed up by the sea.

"Well," said Martin, "this is how men treat one another."

"It is true," said Candide; "there is something diabolical in this
affair."

While speaking, he saw he knew not what, of a shining red, swimming
close to the vessel. They put out the long-boat to see what it could
be: it was one of his sheep! Candide was more rejoiced at the recovery
of this one sheep than he had been grieved at the loss of the hundred
laden with the large diamonds of El Dorado.

The French captain soon saw that the captain of the victorious vessel
was a Spaniard, and that the other was a Dutch pirate, and the very same
one who had robbed Candide. The immense plunder which this villain had
amassed, was buried with him in the sea, and out of the whole only one
sheep was saved.

"You see," said Candide to Martin, "that crime is sometimes punished.
This rogue of a Dutch skipper has met with the fate he deserved."

"Yes," said Martin; "but why should the passengers be doomed also to
destruction? God has punished the knave, and the devil has drowned the
rest."

The French and Spanish ships continued their course, and Candide
continued his conversation with Martin. They disputed fifteen successive
days, and on the last of those fifteen days, they were as far advanced
as on the first. But, however, they chatted, they communicated ideas,
they consoled each other. Candide caressed his sheep.

"Since I have found thee again," said he, "I may likewise chance to find
my Cunegonde."




XXI

CANDIDE AND MARTIN, REASONING, DRAW NEAR THE COAST OF FRANCE.


At length they descried the coast of France.

"Were you ever in France, Mr. Martin?" said Candide.

"Yes," said Martin, "I have been in several provinces. In some one-half
of the people are fools, in others they are too cunning; in some they
are weak and simple, in others they affect to be witty; in all, the
principal occupation is love, the next is slander, and the third is
talking nonsense."

"But, Mr. Martin, have you seen Paris?"

"Yes, I have. All these kinds are found there. It is a chaos--a confused
multitude, where everybody seeks pleasure and scarcely any one finds it,
at least as it appeared to me. I made a short stay there. On my arrival
I was robbed of all I had by pickpockets at the fair of St. Germain. I
myself was taken for a robber and was imprisoned for eight days, after
which I served as corrector of the press to gain the money necessary for
my return to Holland on foot. I knew the whole scribbling rabble, the
party rabble, the fanatic rabble. It is said that there are very polite
people in that city, and I wish to believe it."

"For my part, I have no curiosity to see France," said Candide. "You may
easily imagine that after spending a month at El Dorado I can desire to
behold nothing upon earth but Miss Cunegonde. I go to await her at
Venice. We shall pass through France on our way to Italy. Will you bear
me company?"

"With all my heart," said Martin. "It is said that Venice is fit only
for its own nobility, but that strangers meet with a very good reception
if they have a good deal of money. I have none of it; you have,
therefore I will follow you all over the world."

"But do you believe," said Candide, "that the earth was originally a
sea, as we find it asserted in that large book belonging to the
captain?"

"I do not believe a word of it," said Martin, "any more than I do of the
many ravings which have been published lately."

"But for what end, then, has this world been formed?" said Candide.

"To plague us to death," answered Martin.

"Are you not greatly surprised," continued Candide, "at the love which
these two girls of the Oreillons had for those monkeys, of which I have
already told you?"

"Not at all," said Martin. "I do not see that that passion was strange.
I have seen so many extraordinary things that I have ceased to be
surprised."

"Do you believe," said Candide, "that men have always massacred each
other as they do to-day, that they have always been liars, cheats,
traitors, ingrates, brigands, idiots, thieves, scoundrels, gluttons,
drunkards, misers, envious, ambitious, bloody-minded, calumniators,
debauchees, fanatics, hypocrites, and fools?"

"Do you believe," said Martin, "that hawks have always eaten pigeons
when they have found them?"

"Yes, without doubt," said Candide.

"Well, then," said Martin, "if hawks have always had the same character
why should you imagine that men may have changed theirs?"

"Oh!" said Candide, "there is a vast deal of difference, for free
will----"

And reasoning thus they arrived at Bordeaux.




XXII

WHAT HAPPENED IN FRANCE TO CANDIDE AND MARTIN.


Candide stayed in Bordeaux no longer than was necessary for the selling
of a few of the pebbles of El Dorado, and for hiring a good chaise to
hold two passengers; for he could not travel without his Philosopher
Martin. He was only vexed at parting with his sheep, which he left to
the Bordeaux Academy of Sciences, who set as a subject for that year's
prize, "to find why this sheep's wool was red;" and the prize was
awarded to a learned man of the North, who demonstrated by A plus B
minus C divided by Z, that the sheep must be red, and die of the rot.

Meanwhile, all the travellers whom Candide met in the inns along his
route, said to him, "We go to Paris." This general eagerness at length
gave him, too, a desire to see this capital; and it was not so very
great a _dtour_ from the road to Venice.

He entered Paris by the suburb of St. Marceau, and fancied that he was
in the dirtiest village of Westphalia.

Scarcely was Candide arrived at his inn, than he found himself attacked
by a slight illness, caused by fatigue. As he had a very large diamond
on his finger, and the people of the inn had taken notice of a
prodigiously heavy box among his baggage, there were two physicians to
attend him, though he had never sent for them, and two devotees who
warmed his broths.

"I remember," Martin said, "also to have been sick at Paris in my first
voyage; I was very poor, thus I had neither friends, devotees, nor
doctors, and I recovered."

However, what with physic and bleeding, Candide's illness became
serious. A parson of the neighborhood came with great meekness to ask
for a bill for the other world payable to the bearer. Candide would do
nothing for him; but the devotees assured him it was the new fashion. He
answered that he was not a man of fashion. Martin wished to throw the
priest out of the window. The priest swore that they would not bury
Candide. Martin swore that he would bury the priest if he continued to
be troublesome. The quarrel grew heated. Martin took him by the
shoulders and roughly turned him out of doors; which occasioned great
scandal and a law-suit.

Candide got well again, and during his convalescence he had very good
company to sup with him. They played high. Candide wondered why it was
that the ace never came to him; but Martin was not at all astonished.

Among those who did him the honours of the town was a little Abb of
Perigord, one of those busybodies who are ever alert, officious,
forward, fawning, and complaisant; who watch for strangers in their
passage through the capital, tell them the scandalous history of the
town, and offer them pleasure at all prices. He first took Candide and
Martin to La Comdie, where they played a new tragedy. Candide happened
to be seated near some of the fashionable wits. This did not prevent his
shedding tears at the well-acted scenes. One of these critics at his
side said to him between the acts:

"Your tears are misplaced; that is a shocking actress; the actor who
plays with her is yet worse; and the play is still worse than the
actors. The author does not know a word of Arabic, yet the scene is in
Arabia; moreover he is a man that does not believe in innate ideas; and
I will bring you, to-morrow, twenty pamphlets written against him."[22]

"How many dramas have you in France, sir?" said Candide to the Abb.

"Five or six thousand."

"What a number!" said Candide. "How many good?"

"Fifteen or sixteen," replied the other.

"What a number!" said Martin.

Candide was very pleased with an actress who played Queen Elizabeth in a
somewhat insipid tragedy[23] sometimes acted.

"That actress," said he to Martin, "pleases me much; she has a likeness
to Miss Cunegonde; I should be very glad to wait upon her."

The Perigordian Abb offered to introduce him. Candide, brought up in
Germany, asked what was the etiquette, and how they treated queens of
England in France.

"It is necessary to make distinctions," said the Abb. "In the provinces
one takes them to the inn; in Paris, one respects them when they are
beautiful, and throws them on the highway when they are dead."[24]

"Queens on the highway!" said Candide.

"Yes, truly," said Martin, "the Abb is right. I was in Paris when Miss
Monime passed, as the saying is, from this life to the other. She was
refused what people call the _honours of sepulture_--that is to say, of
rotting with all the beggars of the neighbourhood in an ugly cemetery;
she was interred all alone by her company at the corner of the Rue de
Bourgogne, which ought to trouble her much, for she thought nobly."

"That was very uncivil," said Candide.

"What would you have?" said Martin; "these people are made thus. Imagine
all contradictions, all possible incompatibilities--you will find them
in the government, in the law-courts, in the churches, in the public
shows of this droll nation."

"Is it true that they always laugh in Paris?" said Candide.

"Yes," said the Abb, "but it means nothing, for they complain of
everything with great fits of laughter; they even do the most detestable
things while laughing."

"Who," said Candide, "is that great pig who spoke so ill of the piece at
which I wept, and of the actors who gave me so much pleasure?"

"He is a bad character," answered the Abb, "who gains his livelihood by
saying evil of all plays and of all books. He hates whatever succeeds,
as the eunuchs hate those who enjoy; he is one of the serpents of
literature who nourish themselves on dirt and spite; he is a
_folliculaire_."

"What is a _folliculaire_?" said Candide.

"It is," said the Abb, "a pamphleteer--a Frron."[25]

Thus Candide, Martin, and the Perigordian conversed on the staircase,
while watching every one go out after the performance.

"Although I am eager to see Cunegonde again," said Candide, "I should
like to sup with Miss Clairon, for she appears to me admirable."

The Abb was not the man to approach Miss Clairon, who saw only good
company.

"She is engaged for this evening," he said, "but I shall have the honour
to take you to the house of a lady of quality, and there you will know
Paris as if you had lived in it for years."

Candide, who was naturally curious, let himself be taken to this lady's
house, at the end of the Faubourg St. Honor. The company was occupied
in playing faro; a dozen melancholy punters held each in his hand a
little pack of cards; a bad record of his misfortunes. Profound silence
reigned; pallor was on the faces of the punters, anxiety on that of the
banker, and the hostess, sitting near the unpitying banker, noticed with
lynx-eyes all the doubled and other increased stakes, as each player
dog's-eared his cards; she made them turn down the edges again with
severe, but polite attention; she showed no vexation for fear of losing
her customers. The lady insisted upon being called the Marchioness of
Parolignac. Her daughter, aged fifteen, was among the punters, and
notified with a covert glance the cheatings of the poor people who
tried to repair the cruelties of fate. The Perigordian Abb, Candide and
Martin entered; no one rose, no one saluted them, no one looked at them;
all were profoundly occupied with their cards.

"The Baroness of Thunder-ten-Tronckh was more polite," said Candide.

However, the Abb whispered to the Marchioness, who half rose, honoured
Candide with a gracious smile, and Martin with a condescending nod; she
gave a seat and a pack of cards to Candide, who lost fifty thousand
francs in two deals, after which they supped very gaily, and every one
was astonished that Candide was not moved by his loss; the servants said
among themselves, in the language of servants:--

"Some English lord is here this evening."

The supper passed at first like most Parisian suppers, in silence,
followed by a noise of words which could not be distinguished, then with
pleasantries of which most were insipid, with false news, with bad
reasoning, a little politics, and much evil speaking; they also
discussed new books.

"Have you seen," said the Perigordian Abb, "the romance of Sieur
Gauchat, doctor of divinity?"[26]

"Yes," answered one of the guests, "but I have not been able to finish
it. We have a crowd of silly writings, but all together do not approach
the impertinence of 'Gauchat, Doctor of Divinity.' I am so satiated with
the great number of detestable books with which we are inundated that I
am reduced to punting at faro."

"And the _Mlanges_ of Archdeacon Trublet,[27] what do you say of that?"
said the Abb.

"Ah!" said the Marchioness of Parolignac, "the wearisome mortal! How
curiously he repeats to you all that the world knows! How heavily he
discusses that which is not worth the trouble of lightly remarking upon!
How, without wit, he appropriates the wit of others! How he spoils what
he steals! How he disgusts me! But he will disgust me no longer--it is
enough to have read a few of the Archdeacon's pages."

There was at table a wise man of taste, who supported the Marchioness.
They spoke afterwards of tragedies; the lady asked why there were
tragedies which were sometimes played and which could not be read. The
man of taste explained very well how a piece could have some interest,
and have almost no merit; he proved in few words that it was not enough
to introduce one or two of those situations which one finds in all
romances, and which always seduce the spectator, but that it was
necessary to be new without being odd, often sublime and always
natural, to know the human heart and to make it speak; to be a great
poet without allowing any person in the piece to appear to be a poet; to
know language perfectly--to speak it with purity, with continuous
harmony and without rhythm ever taking anything from sense.

"Whoever," added he, "does not observe all these rules can produce one
or two tragedies, applauded at a theatre, but he will never be counted
in the ranks of good writers. There are very few good tragedies; some
are idylls in dialogue, well written and well rhymed, others political
reasonings which lull to sleep, or amplifications which repel; others
demoniac dreams in barbarous style, interrupted in sequence, with long
apostrophes to the gods, because they do not know how to speak to men,
with false maxims, with bombastic commonplaces!"

Candide listened with attention to this discourse, and conceived a great
idea of the speaker, and as the Marchioness had taken care to place him
beside her, he leaned towards her and took the liberty of asking who was
the man who had spoken so well.

"He is a scholar," said the lady, "who does not play, whom the Abb
sometimes brings to supper; he is perfectly at home among tragedies and
books, and he has written a tragedy which was hissed, and a book of
which nothing has ever been seen outside his bookseller's shop
excepting the copy which he dedicated to me."

"The great man!" said Candide. "He is another Pangloss!"

Then, turning towards him, he said:

"Sir, you think doubtless that all is for the best in the moral and
physical world, and that nothing could be otherwise than it is?"

"I, sir!" answered the scholar, "I know nothing of all that; I find that
all goes awry with me; that no one knows either what is his rank, nor
what is his condition, what he does nor what he ought to do; and that
except supper, which is always gay, and where there appears to be enough
concord, all the rest of the time is passed in impertinent quarrels;
Jansenist against Molinist, Parliament against the Church, men of
letters against men of letters, courtesans against courtesans,
financiers against the people, wives against husbands, relatives against
relatives--it is eternal war."

"I have seen the worst," Candide replied. "But a wise man, who since has
had the misfortune to be hanged, taught me that all is marvellously
well; these are but the shadows on a beautiful picture."

"Your hanged man mocked the world," said Martin. "The shadows are
horrible blots."

"They are men who make the blots," said Candide, "and they cannot be
dispensed with."

"It is not their fault then," said Martin.

Most of the punters, who understood nothing of this language, drank, and
Martin reasoned with the scholar, and Candide related some of his
adventures to his hostess.

After supper the Marchioness took Candide into her boudoir, and made him
sit upon a sofa.

"Ah, well!" said she to him, "you love desperately Miss Cunegonde of
Thunder-ten-Tronckh?"

"Yes, madame," answered Candide.

The Marchioness replied to him with a tender smile:

"You answer me like a young man from Westphalia. A Frenchman would have
said, 'It is true that I have loved Miss Cunegonde, but seeing you,
madame, I think I no longer love her.'"

"Alas! madame," said Candide, "I will answer you as you wish."

"Your passion for her," said the Marchioness, "commenced by picking up
her handkerchief. I wish that you would pick up my garter."

"With all my heart," said Candide. And he picked it up.

"But I wish that you would put it on," said the lady.

And Candide put it on.

"You see," said she, "you are a foreigner. I sometimes make my Parisian
lovers languish for fifteen days, but I give myself to you the first
night because one must do the honours of one's country to a young man
from Westphalia."

The lady having perceived two enormous diamonds upon the hands of the
young foreigner praised them with such good faith that from Candide's
fingers they passed to her own.

Candide, returning with the Perigordian Abb, felt some remorse in
having been unfaithful to Miss Cunegonde. The Abb sympathised in his
trouble; he had had but a light part of the fifty thousand francs lost
at play and of the value of the two brilliants, half given, half
extorted. His design was to profit as much as he could by the advantages
which the acquaintance of Candide could procure for him. He spoke much
of Cunegonde, and Candide told him that he should ask forgiveness of
that beautiful one for his infidelity when he should see her in Venice.

The Abb redoubled his politeness and attentions, and took a tender
interest in all that Candide said, in all that he did, in all that he
wished to do.

"And so, sir, you have a rendezvous at Venice?"

"Yes, monsieur Abb," answered Candide. "It is absolutely necessary
that I go to meet Miss Cunegonde."

And then the pleasure of talking of that which he loved induced him to
relate, according to his custom, part of his adventures with the fair
Westphalian.

"I believe," said the Abb, "that Miss Cunegonde has a great deal of
wit, and that she writes charming letters?"

"I have never received any from her," said Candide, "for being expelled
from the castle on her account I had not an opportunity for writing to
her. Soon after that I heard she was dead; then I found her alive; then
I lost her again; and last of all, I sent an express to her two thousand
five hundred leagues from here, and I wait for an answer."

The Abb listened attentively, and seemed to be in a brown study. He
soon took his leave of the two foreigners after a most tender embrace.
The following day Candide received, on awaking, a letter couched in
these terms:

"My very dear love, for eight days I have been ill in this town. I learn
that you are here. I would fly to your arms if I could but move. I was
informed of your passage at Bordeaux, where I left faithful Cacambo and
the old woman, who are to follow me very soon. The Governor of Buenos
Ayres has taken all, but there remains to me your heart. Come! your
presence will either give me life or kill me with pleasure."

This charming, this unhoped-for letter transported Candide with an
inexpressible joy, and the illness of his dear Cunegonde overwhelmed him
with grief. Divided between those two passions, he took his gold and his
diamonds and hurried away, with Martin, to the hotel where Miss
Cunegonde was lodged. He entered her room trembling, his heart
palpitating, his voice sobbing; he wished to open the curtains of the
bed, and asked for a light.

"Take care what you do," said the servant-maid; "the light hurts her,"
and immediately she drew the curtain again.

"My dear Cunegonde," said Candide, weeping, "how are you? If you cannot
see me, at least speak to me."

"She cannot speak," said the maid.

The lady then put a plump hand out from the bed, and Candide bathed it
with his tears and afterwards filled it with diamonds, leaving a bag of
gold upon the easy chair.

In the midst of these transports in came an officer, followed by the
Abb and a file of soldiers.

"There," said he, "are the two suspected foreigners," and at the same
time he ordered them to be seized and carried to prison.

"Travellers are not treated thus in El Dorado," said Candide.

"I am more a Manichean now than ever," said Martin.

"But pray, sir, where are you going to carry us?" said Candide.

"To a dungeon," answered the officer.

Martin, having recovered himself a little, judged that the lady who
acted the part of Cunegonde was a cheat, that the Perigordian Abb was a
knave who had imposed upon the honest simplicity of Candide, and that
the officer was another knave whom they might easily silence.

Candide, advised by Martin and impatient to see the real Cunegonde,
rather than expose himself before a court of justice, proposed to the
officer to give him three small diamonds, each worth about three
thousand pistoles.

"Ah, sir," said the man with the ivory baton, "had you committed all the
imaginable crimes you would be to me the most honest man in the world.
Three diamonds! Each worth three thousand pistoles! Sir, instead of
carrying you to jail I would lose my life to serve you. There are orders
for arresting all foreigners, but leave it to me. I have a brother at
Dieppe in Normandy! I'll conduct you thither, and if you have a diamond
to give him he'll take as much care of you as I would."

"And why," said Candide, "should all foreigners be arrested?"

"It is," the Perigordian Abb then made answer, "because a poor beggar
of the country of Atrbatie[28] heard some foolish things said. This
induced him to commit a parricide, not such as that of 1610 in the month
of May,[29] but such as that of 1594 in the month of December,[30] and
such as others which have been committed in other years and other months
by other poor devils who had heard nonsense spoken."

The officer then explained what the Abb meant.

"Ah, the monsters!" cried Candide. "What horrors among a people who
dance and sing! Is there no way of getting quickly out of this country
where monkeys provoke tigers? I have seen no bears in my country, but
_men_ I have beheld nowhere except in El Dorado. In the name of God,
sir, conduct me to Venice, where I am to await Miss Cunegonde."

"I can conduct you no further than lower Normandy," said the officer.

Immediately he ordered his irons to be struck off, acknowledged himself
mistaken, sent away his men, set out with Candide and Martin for Dieppe,
and left them in the care of his brother.

There was then a small Dutch ship in the harbour. The Norman, who by the
virtue of three more diamonds had become the most subservient of men,
put Candide and his attendants on board a vessel that was just ready to
set sail for Portsmouth in England.

This was not the way to Venice, but Candide thought he had made his way
out of hell, and reckoned that he would soon have an opportunity for
resuming his journey.




XXIII

CANDIDE AND MARTIN TOUCHED UPON THE COAST OF ENGLAND, AND WHAT THEY SAW
THERE.


"Ah, Pangloss! Pangloss! Ah, Martin! Martin! Ah, my dear Cunegonde, what
sort of a world is this?" said Candide on board the Dutch ship.

"Something very foolish and abominable," said Martin.

"You know England? Are they as foolish there as in France?"

"It is another kind of folly," said Martin. "You know that these two
nations are at war for a few acres of snow in Canada,[31] and that they
spend over this beautiful war much more than Canada is worth. To tell
you exactly, whether there are more people fit to send to a madhouse in
one country than the other, is what my imperfect intelligence will not
permit. I only know in general that the people we are going to see are
very atrabilious."

Talking thus they arrived at Portsmouth. The coast was lined with crowds
of people, whose eyes were fixed on a fine man kneeling, with his eyes
bandaged, on board one of the men of war in the harbour. Four soldiers
stood opposite to this man; each of them fired three balls at his head,
with all the calmness in the world; and the whole assembly went away
very well satisfied.

"What is all this?" said Candide; "and what demon is it that exercises
his empire in this country?"

He then asked who was that fine man who had been killed with so much
ceremony. They answered, he was an Admiral.[32]

"And why kill this Admiral?"

"It is because he did not kill a sufficient number of men himself. He
gave battle to a French Admiral; and it has been proved that he was not
near enough to him."

"But," replied Candide, "the French Admiral was as far from the English
Admiral."

"There is no doubt of it; but in this country it is found good, from
time to time, to kill one Admiral to encourage the others."

Candide was so shocked and bewildered by what he saw and heard, that he
would not set foot on shore, and he made a bargain with the Dutch
skipper (were he even to rob him like the Surinam captain) to conduct
him without delay to Venice.

The skipper was ready in two days. They coasted France; they passed in
sight of Lisbon, and Candide trembled. They passed through the Straits,
and entered the Mediterranean. At last they landed at Venice.

"God be praised!" said Candide, embracing Martin. "It is here that I
shall see again my beautiful Cunegonde. I trust Cacambo as myself. All
is well, all will be well, all goes as well as possible."




XXIV

OF PAQUETTE AND FRIAR GIROFLE.


Upon their arrival at Venice, Candide went to search for Cacambo at
every inn and coffee-house, and among all the ladies of pleasure, but to
no purpose. He sent every day to inquire on all the ships that came in.
But there was no news of Cacambo.

"What!" said he to Martin, "I have had time to voyage from Surinam to
Bordeaux, to go from Bordeaux to Paris, from Paris to Dieppe, from
Dieppe to Portsmouth, to coast along Portugal and Spain, to cross the
whole Mediterranean, to spend some months, and yet the beautiful
Cunegonde has not arrived! Instead of her I have only met a Parisian
wench and a Perigordian Abb. Cunegonde is dead without doubt, and there
is nothing for me but to die. Alas! how much better it would have been
for me to have remained in the paradise of El Dorado than to come back
to this cursed Europe! You are in the right, my dear Martin: all is
misery and illusion."

He fell into a deep melancholy, and neither went to see the opera, nor
any of the other diversions of the Carnival; nay, he was proof against
the temptations of all the ladies.

"You are in truth very simple," said Martin to him, "if you imagine that
a mongrel valet, who has five or six millions in his pocket, will go to
the other end of the world to seek your mistress and bring her to you to
Venice. If he find her, he will keep her to himself; if he do not find
her he will get another. I advise you to forget your valet Cacambo and
your mistress Cunegonde."

Martin was not consoling. Candide's melancholy increased; and Martin
continued to prove to him that there was very little virtue or happiness
upon earth, except perhaps in El Dorado, where nobody could gain
admittance.

While they were disputing on this important subject and waiting for
Cunegonde, Candide saw a young Theatin friar in St. Mark's Piazza,
holding a girl on his arm. The Theatin looked fresh coloured, plump, and
vigorous; his eyes were sparkling, his air assured, his look lofty, and
his step bold. The girl was very pretty, and sang; she looked amorously
at her Theatin, and from time to time pinched his fat cheeks.

"At least you will allow me," said Candide to Martin, "that these two
are happy. Hitherto I have met with none but unfortunate people in the
whole habitable globe, except in El Dorado; but as to this pair, I would
venture to lay a wager that they are very happy."

"I lay you they are not," said Martin.

"We need only ask them to dine with us," said Candide, "and you will see
whether I am mistaken."

Immediately he accosted them, presented his compliments, and invited
them to his inn to eat some macaroni, with Lombard partridges, and
caviare, and to drink some Montepulciano, Lachrym Christi, Cyprus and
Samos wine. The girl blushed, the Theatin accepted the invitation and
she followed him, casting her eyes on Candide with confusion and
surprise, and dropping a few tears. No sooner had she set foot in
Candide's apartment than she cried out:

"Ah! Mr. Candide does not know Paquette again."

Candide had not viewed her as yet with attention, his thoughts being
entirely taken up with Cunegonde; but recollecting her as she spoke.

"Alas!" said he, "my poor child, it is you who reduced Doctor Pangloss
to the beautiful condition in which I saw him?"

"Alas! it was I, sir, indeed," answered Paquette. "I see that you have
heard all. I have been informed of the frightful disasters that befell
the family of my lady Baroness, and the fair Cunegonde. I swear to you
that my fate has been scarcely less sad. I was very innocent when you
knew me. A Grey Friar, who was my confessor, easily seduced me. The
consequences were terrible. I was obliged to quit the castle some time
after the Baron had sent you away with kicks on the backside. If a
famous surgeon had not taken compassion on me, I should have died. For
some time I was this surgeon's mistress, merely out of gratitude. His
wife, who was mad with jealousy, beat me every day unmercifully; she was
a fury. The surgeon was one of the ugliest of men, and I the most
wretched of women, to be continually beaten for a man I did not love.
You know, sir, what a dangerous thing it is for an ill-natured woman to
be married to a doctor. Incensed at the behaviour of his wife, he one
day gave her so effectual a remedy to cure her of a slight cold, that
she died two hours after, in most horrid convulsions. The wife's
relations prosecuted the husband; he took flight, and I was thrown into
jail. My innocence would not have saved me if I had not been
good-looking. The judge set me free, on condition that he succeeded the
surgeon. I was soon supplanted by a rival, turned out of doors quite
destitute, and obliged to continue this abominable trade, which appears
so pleasant to you men, while to us women it is the utmost abyss of
misery. I have come to exercise the profession at Venice. Ah! sir, if
you could only imagine what it is to be obliged to caress indifferently
an old merchant, a lawyer, a monk, a gondolier, an abb, to be exposed
to abuse and insults; to be often reduced to borrowing a petticoat, only
to go and have it raised by a disagreeable man; to be robbed by one of
what one has earned from another; to be subject to the extortions of the
officers of justice; and to have in prospect only a frightful old age, a
hospital, and a dung-hill; you would conclude that I am one of the most
unhappy creatures in the world."[33]

Paquette thus opened her heart to honest Candide, in the presence of
Martin, who said to his friend:

"You see that already I have won half the wager."

Friar Girofle stayed in the dining-room, and drank a glass or two of
wine while he was waiting for dinner.

"But," said Candide to Paquette, "you looked so gay and content when I
met you; you sang and you behaved so lovingly to the Theatin, that you
seemed to me as happy as you pretend to be now the reverse."

"Ah! sir," answered Paquette, "this is one of the miseries of the trade.
Yesterday I was robbed and beaten by an officer; yet to-day I must put
on good humour to please a friar."

Candide wanted no more convincing; he owned that Martin was in the
right. They sat down to table with Paquette and the Theatin; the repast
was entertaining; and towards the end they conversed with all
confidence.

"Father," said Candide to the Friar, "you appear to me to enjoy a state
that all the world might envy; the flower of health shines in your face,
your expression makes plain your happiness; you have a very pretty girl
for your recreation, and you seem well satisfied with your state as a
Theatin."

"My faith, sir," said Friar Girofle, "I wish that all the Theatins were
at the bottom of the sea. I have been tempted a hundred times to set
fire to the convent, and go and become a Turk. My parents forced me at
the age of fifteen to put on this detestable habit, to increase the
fortune of a cursed elder brother, whom God confound. Jealousy, discord,
and fury, dwell in the convent. It is true I have preached a few bad
sermons that have brought me in a little money, of which the prior stole
half, while the rest serves to maintain my girls; but when I return at
night to the monastery, I am ready to dash my head against the walls of
the dormitory; and all my fellows are in the same case."

Martin turned towards Candide with his usual coolness.

"Well," said he, "have I not won the whole wager?"

Candide gave two thousand piastres to Paquette, and one thousand to
Friar Girofle.

"I'll answer for it," said he, "that with this they will be happy."

"I do not believe it at all," said Martin; "you will, perhaps, with
these piastres only render them the more unhappy."

"Let that be as it may," said Candide, "but one thing consoles me. I see
that we often meet with those whom we expected never to see more; so
that, perhaps, as I have found my red sheep and Paquette, it may well be
that I shall also find Cunegonde."

"I wish," said Martin, "she may one day make you very happy; but I doubt
it very much."

"You are very hard of belief," said Candide.

"I have lived," said Martin.

"You see those gondoliers," said Candide, "are they not perpetually
singing?"

"You do not see them," said Martin, "at home with their wives and brats.
The Doge has his troubles, the gondoliers have theirs. It is true that,
all things considered, the life of a gondolier is preferable to that of
a Doge; but I believe the difference to be so trifling that it is not
worth the trouble of examining."

"People talk," said Candide, "of the Senator Pococurante, who lives in
that fine palace on the Brenta, where he entertains foreigners in the
politest manner. They pretend that this man has never felt any
uneasiness."

"I should be glad to see such a rarity," said Martin.

Candide immediately sent to ask the Lord Pococurante permission to wait
upon him the next day.




XXV

THE VISIT TO LORD POCOCURANTE, A NOBLE VENETIAN.


Candide and Martin went in a gondola on the Brenta, and arrived at the
palace of the noble Signor Pococurante. The gardens, laid out with
taste, were adorned with fine marble statues. The palace was beautifully
built. The master of the house was a man of sixty, and very rich. He
received the two travellers with polite indifference, which put Candide
a little out of countenance, but was not at all disagreeable to Martin.

First, two pretty girls, very neatly dressed, served them with
chocolate, which was frothed exceedingly well. Candide could not refrain
from commending their beauty, grace, and address.

"They are good enough creatures," said the Senator. "I make them lie
with me sometimes, for I am very tired of the ladies of the town, of
their coquetries, of their jealousies, of their quarrels, of their
humours, of their pettinesses, of their prides, of their follies, and of
the sonnets which one must make, or have made, for them. But after all,
these two girls begin to weary me."

After breakfast, Candide walking into a long gallery was surprised by
the beautiful pictures. He asked, by what master were the two first.

"They are by Raphael," said the Senator. "I bought them at a great
price, out of vanity, some years ago. They are said to be the finest
things in Italy, but they do not please me at all. The colours are too
dark, the figures are not sufficiently rounded, nor in good relief; the
draperies in no way resemble stuffs. In a word, whatever may be said, I
do not find there a true imitation of nature. I only care for a picture
when I think I see nature itself; and there are none of this sort. I
have a great many pictures, but I prize them very little."

While they were waiting for dinner Pococurante ordered a concert.
Candide found the music delicious.

"This noise," said the Senator, "may amuse one for half an hour; but if
it were to last longer it would grow tiresome to everybody, though they
durst not own it. Music, to-day, is only the art of executing difficult
things, and that which is only difficult cannot please long. Perhaps I
should be fonder of the opera if they had not found the secret of making
of it a monster which shocks me. Let who will go to see bad tragedies
set to music, where the scenes are contrived for no other end than to
introduce two or three songs ridiculously out of place, to show off an
actress's voice. Let who will, or who can, die away with pleasure at the
sight of an eunuch quavering the _rle_ of Csar, or of Cato, and
strutting awkwardly upon the stage. For my part I have long since
renounced those paltry entertainments which constitute the glory of
modern Italy, and are purchased so dearly by sovereigns."

Candide disputed the point a little, but with discretion. Martin was
entirely of the Senator's opinion.

They sat down to table, and after an excellent dinner they went into the
library. Candide, seeing a Homer magnificently bound, commended the
virtuoso on his good taste.

"There," said he, "is a book that was once the delight of the great
Pangloss, the best philosopher in Germany."

"It is not mine," answered Pococurante coolly. "They used at one time to
make me believe that I took a pleasure in reading him. But that
continual repetition of battles, so extremely like one another; those
gods that are always active without doing anything decisive; that Helen
who is the cause of the war, and who yet scarcely appears in the piece;
that Troy, so long besieged without being taken; all these together
caused me great weariness. I have sometimes asked learned men whether
they were not as weary as I of that work. Those who were sincere have
owned to me that the poem made them fall asleep; yet it was necessary to
have it in their library as a monument of antiquity, or like those rusty
medals which are no longer of use in commerce."

"But your Excellency does not think thus of Virgil?" said Candide.

"I grant," said the Senator, "that the second, fourth, and sixth books
of his _neid_ are excellent, but as for his pious neas, his strong
Cloanthus, his friend Achates, his little Ascanius, his silly King
Latinus, his bourgeois Amata, his insipid Lavinia, I think there can be
nothing more flat and disagreeable. I prefer Tasso a good deal, or even
the soporific tales of Ariosto."

"May I presume to ask you, sir," said Candide, "whether you do not
receive a great deal of pleasure from reading Horace?"

"There are maxims in this writer," answered Pococurante, "from which a
man of the world may reap great benefit, and being written in energetic
verse they are more easily impressed upon the memory. But I care little
for his journey to Brundusium, and his account of a bad dinner, or of
his low quarrel between one Rupilius whose words he says were full of
poisonous filth, and another whose language was imbued with vinegar. I
have read with much distaste his indelicate verses against old women and
witches; nor do I see any merit in telling his friend Mcenas that if he
will but rank him in the choir of lyric poets, his lofty head shall
touch the stars. Fools admire everything in an author of reputation. For
my part, I read only to please myself. I like only that which serves my
purpose."

Candide, having been educated never to judge for himself, was much
surprised at what he heard. Martin found there was a good deal of reason
in Pococurante's remarks.

"Oh! here is Cicero," said Candide. "Here is the great man whom I fancy
you are never tired of reading."

"I never read him," replied the Venetian. "What is it to me whether he
pleads for Rabirius or Cluentius? I try causes enough myself; his
philosophical works seem to me better, but when I found that he doubted
of everything, I concluded that I knew as much as he, and that I had no
need of a guide to learn ignorance."

"Ha! here are four-score volumes of the Academy of Sciences," cried
Martin. "Perhaps there is something valuable in this collection."

"There might be," said Pococurante, "if only one of those rakers of
rubbish had shown how to make pins; but in all these volumes there is
nothing but chimerical systems, and not a single useful thing."

"And what dramatic works I see here," said Candide, "in Italian,
Spanish, and French."

"Yes," replied the Senator, "there are three thousand, and not three
dozen of them good for anything. As to those collections of sermons,
which altogether are not worth a single page of Seneca, and those huge
volumes of theology, you may well imagine that neither I nor any one
else ever opens them."

Martin saw some shelves filled with English books.

"I have a notion," said he, "that a Republican must be greatly pleased
with most of these books, which are written with a spirit of freedom."

"Yes," answered Pococurante, "it is noble to write as one thinks; this
is the privilege of humanity. In all our Italy we write only what we do
not think; those who inhabit the country of the Csars and the
Antoninuses dare not acquire a single idea without the permission of a
Dominican friar. I should be pleased with the liberty which inspires the
English genius if passion and party spirit did not corrupt all that is
estimable in this precious liberty."

Candide, observing a Milton, asked whether he did not look upon this
author as a great man.

"Who?" said Pococurante, "that barbarian, who writes a long commentary
in ten books of harsh verse on the first chapter of Genesis; that coarse
imitator of the Greeks, who disfigures the Creation, and who, while
Moses represents the Eternal producing the world by a word, makes the
Messiah take a great pair of compasses from the armoury of heaven to
circumscribe His work? How can I have any esteem for a writer who has
spoiled Tasso's hell and the devil, who transforms Lucifer sometimes
into a toad and other times into a pigmy, who makes him repeat the same
things a hundred times, who makes him dispute on theology, who, by a
serious imitation of Ariosto's comic invention of firearms, represents
the devils cannonading in heaven? Neither I nor any man in Italy could
take pleasure in those melancholy extravagances; and the marriage of Sin
and Death, and the snakes brought forth by Sin, are enough to turn the
stomach of any one with the least taste, [and his long description of a
pest-house is good only for a grave-digger]. This obscure, whimsical,
and disagreeable poem was despised upon its first publication, and I
only treat it now as it was treated in its own country by
contemporaries. For the matter of that I say what I think, and I care
very little whether others think as I do."

Candide was grieved at this speech, for he had a respect for Homer and
was fond of Milton.

"Alas!" said he softly to Martin, "I am afraid that this man holds our
German poets in very great contempt."

"There would not be much harm in that," said Martin.

"Oh! what a superior man," said Candide below his breath. "What a great
genius is this Pococurante! Nothing can please him."

After their survey of the library they went down into the garden, where
Candide praised its several beauties.

"I know of nothing in so bad a taste," said the master. "All you see
here is merely trifling. After to-morrow I will have it planted with a
nobler design."

"Well," said Candide to Martin when they had taken their leave, "you
will agree that this is the happiest of mortals, for he is above
everything he possesses."

"But do you not see," answered Martin, "that he is disgusted with all he
possesses? Plato observed a long while ago that those stomachs are not
the best that reject all sorts of food."

"But is there not a pleasure," said Candide, "in criticising
everything, in pointing out faults where others see nothing but
beauties?"

"That is to say," replied Martin, "that there is some pleasure in having
no pleasure."

"Well, well," said Candide, "I find that I shall be the only happy man
when I am blessed with the sight of my dear Cunegonde."

"It is always well to hope," said Martin.

However, the days and the weeks passed. Cacambo did not come, and
Candide was so overwhelmed with grief that he did not even reflect that
Paquette and Friar Girofle did not return to thank him.




XXVI

OF A SUPPER WHICH CANDIDE AND MARTIN TOOK WITH SIX STRANGERS, AND WHO
THEY WERE.[34]


One evening that Candide and Martin were going to sit down to supper
with some foreigners who lodged in the same inn, a man whose complexion
was as black as soot, came behind Candide, and taking him by the arm,
said:

"Get yourself ready to go along with us; do not fail."

Upon this he turned round and saw--Cacambo! Nothing but the sight of
Cunegonde could have astonished and delighted him more. He was on the
point of going mad with joy. He embraced his dear friend.

"Cunegonde is here, without doubt; where is she? Take me to her that I
may die of joy in her company."

"Cunegonde is not here," said Cacambo, "she is at Constantinople."

"Oh, heavens! at Constantinople! But were she in China I would fly
thither; let us be off."

"We shall set out after supper," replied Cacambo. "I can tell you
nothing more; I am a slave, my master awaits me, I must serve him at
table; speak not a word, eat, and then get ready."

Candide, distracted between joy and grief, delighted at seeing his
faithful agent again, astonished at finding him a slave, filled with the
fresh hope of recovering his mistress, his heart palpitating, his
understanding confused, sat down to table with Martin, who saw all these
scenes quite unconcerned, and with six strangers who had come to spend
the Carnival at Venice.

Cacambo waited at table upon one of the strangers; towards the end of
the entertainment he drew near his master, and whispered in his ear:

"Sire, your Majesty may start when you please, the vessel is ready."

On saying these words he went out. The company in great surprise looked
at one another without speaking a word, when another domestic approached
his master and said to him:

"Sire, your Majesty's chaise is at Padua, and the boat is ready."

The master gave a nod and the servant went away. The company all stared
at one another again, and their surprise redoubled. A third valet came
up to a third stranger, saying:

"Sire, believe me, your Majesty ought not to stay here any longer. I am
going to get everything ready."

And immediately he disappeared. Candide and Martin did not doubt that
this was a masquerade of the Carnival. Then a fourth domestic said to a
fourth master:

"Your Majesty may depart when you please."

Saying this he went away like the rest. The fifth valet said the same
thing to the fifth master. But the sixth valet spoke differently to the
sixth stranger, who sat near Candide. He said to him:

"Faith, Sire, they will no longer give credit to your Majesty nor to me,
and we may perhaps both of us be put in jail this very night. Therefore
I will take care of myself. Adieu."

The servants being all gone, the six strangers, with Candide and Martin,
remained in a profound silence. At length Candide broke it.

"Gentlemen," said he, "this is a very good joke indeed, but why should
you all be kings? For me I own that neither Martin nor I is a king."

Cacambo's master then gravely answered in Italian:

"I am not at all joking. My name is Achmet III. I was Grand Sultan many
years. I dethroned my brother; my nephew dethroned me, my viziers were
beheaded, and I am condemned to end my days in the old Seraglio. My
nephew, the great Sultan Mahmoud, permits me to travel sometimes for my
health, and I am come to spend the Carnival at Venice."

A young man who sat next to Achmet, spoke then as follows:

"My name is Ivan. I was once Emperor of all the Russias, but was
dethroned in my cradle. My parents were confined in prison and I was
educated there; yet I am sometimes allowed to travel in company with
persons who act as guards; and I am come to spend the Carnival at
Venice."

The third said:

"I am Charles Edward, King of England; my father has resigned all his
legal rights to me. I have fought in defence of them; and above eight
hundred of my adherents have been hanged, drawn, and quartered. I have
been confined in prison; I am going to Rome, to pay a visit to the King,
my father, who was dethroned as well as myself and my grandfather, and I
am come to spend the Carnival at Venice."

The fourth spoke thus in his turn:

"I am the King of Poland; the fortune of war has stripped me of my
hereditary dominions; my father underwent the same vicissitudes; I
resign myself to Providence in the same manner as Sultan Achmet, the
Emperor Ivan, and King Charles Edward, whom God long preserve; and I am
come to the Carnival at Venice."

The fifth said:

"I am King of Poland also; I have been twice dethroned; but Providence
has given me another country, where I have done more good than all the
Sarmatian kings were ever capable of doing on the banks of the Vistula;
I resign myself likewise to Providence, and am come to pass the Carnival
at Venice."

It was now the sixth monarch's turn to speak:

"Gentlemen," said he, "I am not so great a prince as any of you;
however, I am a king. I am Theodore, elected King of Corsica; I had the
title of Majesty, and now I am scarcely treated as a gentleman. I have
coined money, and now am not worth a farthing; I have had two
secretaries of state, and now I have scarce a valet; I have seen myself
on a throne, and I have seen myself upon straw in a common jail in
London. I am afraid that I shall meet with the same treatment here
though, like your majesties, I am come to see the Carnival at Venice."

The other five kings listened to this speech with generous compassion.
Each of them gave twenty sequins to King Theodore to buy him clothes and
linen; and Candide made him a present of a diamond worth two thousand
sequins.

"Who can this private person be," said the five kings to one another,
"who is able to give, and really has given, a hundred times as much as
any of us?"

Just as they rose from table, in came four Serene Highnesses, who had
also been stripped of their territories by the fortune of war, and were
come to spend the Carnival at Venice. But Candide paid no regard to
these newcomers, his thoughts were entirely employed on his voyage to
Constantinople, in search of his beloved Cunegonde.




XXVII

CANDIDE'S VOYAGE TO CONSTANTINOPLE.


The faithful Cacambo had already prevailed upon the Turkish skipper, who
was to conduct the Sultan Achmet to Constantinople, to receive Candide
and Martin on his ship. They both embarked after having made their
obeisance to his miserable Highness.

"You see," said Candide to Martin on the way, "we supped with six
dethroned kings, and of those six there was one to whom I gave charity.
Perhaps there are many other princes yet more unfortunate. For my part,
I have only lost a hundred sheep; and now I am flying into Cunegonde's
arms. My dear Martin, yet once more Pangloss was right: all is for the
best."

"I wish it," answered Martin.

"But," said Candide, "it was a very strange adventure we met with at
Venice. It has never before been seen or heard that six dethroned kings
have supped together at a public inn."

"It is not more extraordinary," said Martin, "than most of the things
that have happened to us. It is a very common thing for kings to be
dethroned; and as for the honour we have had of supping in their
company, it is a trifle not worth our attention."

No sooner had Candide got on board the vessel than he flew to his old
valet and friend Cacambo, and tenderly embraced him.

"Well," said he, "what news of Cunegonde? Is she still a prodigy of
beauty? Does she love me still? How is she? Thou hast doubtless bought
her a palace at Constantinople?"

"My dear master," answered Cacambo, "Cunegonde washes dishes on the
banks of the Propontis, in the service of a prince, who has very few
dishes to wash; she is a slave in the family of an ancient sovereign
named Ragotsky,[35] to whom the Grand Turk allows three crowns a day in
his exile. But what is worse still is, that she has lost her beauty and
has become horribly ugly."

"Well, handsome or ugly," replied Candide, "I am a man of honour, and it
is my duty to love her still. But how came she to be reduced to so
abject a state with the five or six millions that you took to her?"

"Ah!" said Cacambo, "was I not to give two millions to Senor Don
Fernando d'Ibaraa, y Figueora, y Mascarenes, y Lampourdos, y Souza,
Governor of Buenos Ayres, for permitting Miss Cunegonde to come away?
And did not a corsair bravely rob us of all the rest? Did not this
corsair carry us to Cape Matapan, to Milo, to Nicaria, to Samos, to
Petra, to the Dardanelles, to Marmora, to Scutari? Cunegonde and the old
woman serve the prince I now mentioned to you, and I am slave to the
dethroned Sultan."

"What a series of shocking calamities!" cried Candide. "But after all, I
have some diamonds left; and I may easily pay Cunegonde's ransom. Yet it
is a pity that she is grown so ugly."

Then, turning towards Martin: "Who do you think," said he, "is most to
be pitied--the Sultan Achmet, the Emperor Ivan, King Charles Edward, or
I?"

"How should I know!" answered Martin. "I must see into your hearts to be
able to tell."

"Ah!" said Candide, "if Pangloss were here, he could tell."

"I know not," said Martin, "in what sort of scales your Pangloss would
weigh the misfortunes of mankind and set a just estimate on their
sorrows. All that I can presume to say is, that there are millions of
people upon earth who have a hundred times more to complain of than King
Charles Edward, the Emperor Ivan, or the Sultan Achmet."

"That may well be," said Candide.

In a few days they reached the Bosphorus, and Candide began by paying a
very high ransom for Cacambo. Then without losing time, he and his
companions went on board a galley, in order to search on the banks of
the Propontis for his Cunegonde, however ugly she might have become.

Among the crew there were two slaves who rowed very badly, and to whose
bare shoulders the Levantine captain would now and then apply blows from
a bull's pizzle. Candide, from a natural impulse, looked at these two
slaves more attentively than at the other oarsmen, and approached them
with pity. Their features though greatly disfigured, had a slight
resemblance to those of Pangloss and the unhappy Jesuit and Westphalian
Baron, brother to Miss Cunegonde. This moved and saddened him. He looked
at them still more attentively.

"Indeed," said he to Cacambo, "if I had not seen Master Pangloss hanged,
and if I had not had the misfortune to kill the Baron, I should think it
was they that were rowing."

At the names of the Baron and of Pangloss, the two galley-slaves uttered
a loud cry, held fast by the seat, and let drop their oars. The captain
ran up to them and redoubled his blows with the bull's pizzle.

"Stop! stop! sir," cried Candide. "I will give you what money you
please."

"What! it is Candide!" said one of the slaves.

"What! it is Candide!" said the other.

"Do I dream?" cried Candide; "am I awake? or am I on board a galley? Is
this the Baron whom I killed? Is this Master Pangloss whom I saw
hanged?"

"It is we! it is we!" answered they.

"Well! is this the great philosopher?" said Martin.

"Ah! captain," said Candide, "what ransom will you take for Monsieur de
Thunder-ten-Tronckh, one of the first barons of the empire, and for
Monsieur Pangloss, the profoundest metaphysician in Germany?"

"Dog of a Christian," answered the Levantine captain, "since these two
dogs of Christian slaves are barons and metaphysicians, which I doubt
not are high dignities in their country, you shall give me fifty
thousand sequins."

"You shall have them, sir. Carry me back at once to Constantinople, and
you shall receive the money directly. But no; carry me first to Miss
Cunegonde."

Upon the first proposal made by Candide, however, the Levantine captain
had already tacked about, and made the crew ply their oars quicker than
a bird cleaves the air.

Candide embraced the Baron and Pangloss a hundred times.

"And how happened it, my dear Baron, that I did not kill you? And, my
dear Pangloss, how came you to life again after being hanged? And why
are you both in a Turkish galley?"

"And it is true that my dear sister is in this country?" said the Baron.

"Yes," answered Cacambo.

"Then I behold, once more, my dear Candide," cried Pangloss.

Candide presented Martin and Cacambo to them; they embraced each other,
and all spoke at once. The galley flew; they were already in the port.
Instantly Candide sent for a Jew, to whom he sold for fifty thousand
sequins a diamond worth a hundred thousand, though the fellow swore to
him by Abraham that he could give him no more. He immediately paid the
ransom for the Baron and Pangloss. The latter threw himself at the feet
of his deliverer, and bathed them with his tears; the former thanked him
with a nod, and promised to return him the money on the first
opportunity.

"But is it indeed possible that my sister can be in Turkey?" said he.

"Nothing is more possible," said Cacambo, "since she scours the dishes
in the service of a Transylvanian prince."

Candide sent directly for two Jews and sold them some more diamonds, and
then they all set out together in another galley to deliver Cunegonde
from slavery.




XXVIII

WHAT HAPPENED TO CANDIDE, CUNEGONDE, PANGLOSS, MARTIN, ETC.


"I ask your pardon once more," said Candide to the Baron, "your pardon,
reverend father, for having run you through the body."

"Say no more about it," answered the Baron. "I was a little too hasty, I
own, but since you wish to know by what fatality I came to be a
galley-slave I will inform you. After I had been cured by the surgeon of
the college of the wound you gave me, I was attacked and carried off by
a party of Spanish troops, who confined me in prison at Buenos Ayres at
the very time my sister was setting out thence. I asked leave to return
to Rome to the General of my Order. I was appointed chaplain to the
French Ambassador at Constantinople. I had not been eight days in this
employment when one evening I met with a young Ichoglan, who was a very
handsome fellow. The weather was warm. The young man wanted to bathe,
and I took this opportunity of bathing also. I did not know that it was
a capital crime for a Christian to be found naked with a young
Mussulman. A cadi ordered me a hundred blows on the soles of the feet,
and condemned me to the galleys. I do not think there ever was a greater
act of injustice. But I should be glad to know how my sister came to be
scullion to a Transylvanian prince who has taken shelter among the
Turks."

"But you, my dear Pangloss," said Candide, "how can it be that I behold
you again?"

"It is true," said Pangloss, "that you saw me hanged. I should have been
burnt, but you may remember it rained exceedingly hard when they were
going to roast me; the storm was so violent that they despaired of
lighting the fire, so I was hanged because they could do no better. A
surgeon purchased my body, carried me home, and dissected me. He began
with making a crucial incision on me from the navel to the clavicula.
One could not have been worse hanged than I was. The executioner of the
Holy Inquisition was a sub-deacon, and knew how to burn people
marvellously well, but he was not accustomed to hanging. The cord was
wet and did not slip properly, and besides it was badly tied; in short,
I still drew my breath, when the crucial incision made me give such a
frightful scream that my surgeon fell flat upon his back, and imagining
that he had been dissecting the devil he ran away, dying with fear, and
fell down the staircase in his flight. His wife, hearing the noise,
flew from the next room. She saw me stretched out upon the table with my
crucial incision. She was seized with yet greater fear than her husband,
fled, and tumbled over him. When they came to themselves a little, I
heard the wife say to her husband: 'My dear, how could you take it into
your head to dissect a heretic? Do you not know that these people always
have the devil in their bodies? I will go and fetch a priest this minute
to exorcise him.' At this proposal I shuddered, and mustering up what
little courage I had still remaining I cried out aloud, 'Have mercy on
me!' At length the Portuguese barber plucked up his spirits. He sewed up
my wounds; his wife even nursed me. I was upon my legs at the end of
fifteen days. The barber found me a place as lackey to a knight of Malta
who was going to Venice, but finding that my master had no money to pay
me my wages I entered the service of a Venetian merchant, and went with
him to Constantinople. One day I took it into my head to step into a
mosque, where I saw an old Iman and a very pretty young devotee who was
saying her paternosters. Her bosom was uncovered, and between her
breasts she had a beautiful bouquet of tulips, roses, anemones,
ranunculus, hyacinths, and auriculas. She dropped her bouquet; I picked
it up, and presented it to her with a profound reverence. I was so long
in delivering it that the Iman began to get angry, and seeing that I was
a Christian he called out for help. They carried me before the cadi, who
ordered me a hundred lashes on the soles of the feet and sent me to the
galleys. I was chained to the very same galley and the same bench as the
young Baron. On board this galley there were four young men from
Marseilles, five Neapolitan priests, and two monks from Corfu, who told
us similar adventures happened daily. The Baron maintained that he had
suffered greater injustice than I, and I insisted that it was far more
innocent to take up a bouquet and place it again on a woman's bosom than
to be found stark naked with an Ichoglan. We were continually disputing,
and received twenty lashes with a bull's pizzle when the concatenation
of universal events brought you to our galley, and you were good enough
to ransom us."

"Well, my dear Pangloss," said Candide to him, "when you had been
hanged, dissected, whipped, and were tugging at the oar, did you always
think that everything happens for the best?"

"I am still of my first opinion," answered Pangloss, "for I am a
philosopher and I cannot retract, especially as Leibnitz could never be
wrong; and besides, the pre-established harmony is the finest thing in
the world, and so is his _plenum_ and _materia subtilis_."




XXIX

HOW CANDIDE FOUND CUNEGONDE AND THE OLD WOMAN AGAIN.


While Candide, the Baron, Pangloss, Martin, and Cacambo were relating
their several adventures, were reasoning on the contingent or
non-contingent events of the universe, disputing on effects and causes,
on moral and physical evil, on liberty and necessity, and on the
consolations a slave may feel even on a Turkish galley, they arrived at
the house of the Transylvanian prince on the banks of the Propontis. The
first objects which met their sight were Cunegonde and the old woman
hanging towels out to dry.

The Baron paled at this sight. The tender, loving Candide, seeing his
beautiful Cunegonde embrowned, with blood-shot eyes, withered neck,
wrinkled cheeks, and rough, red arms, recoiled three paces, seized with
horror, and then advanced out of good manners. She embraced Candide and
her brother; they embraced the old woman, and Candide ransomed them
both.

There was a small farm in the neighbourhood which the old woman
proposed to Candide to make a shift with till the company could be
provided for in a better manner. Cunegonde did not know she had grown
ugly, for nobody had told her of it; and she reminded Candide of his
promise in so positive a tone that the good man durst not refuse her. He
therefore intimated to the Baron that he intended marrying his sister.

"I will not suffer," said the Baron, "such meanness on her part, and
such insolence on yours; I will never be reproached with this scandalous
thing; my sister's children would never be able to enter the church in
Germany. No; my sister shall only marry a baron of the empire."

Cunegonde flung herself at his feet, and bathed them with her tears;
still he was inflexible.

"Thou foolish fellow," said Candide; "I have delivered thee out of the
galleys, I have paid thy ransom, and thy sister's also; she was a
scullion, and is very ugly, yet I am so condescending as to marry her;
and dost thou pretend to oppose the match? I should kill thee again,
were I only to consult my anger."

"Thou mayest kill me again," said the Baron, "but thou shalt not marry
my sister, at least whilst I am living."




XXX

THE CONCLUSION.


At the bottom of his heart Candide had no wish to marry Cunegonde. But
the extreme impertinence of the Baron determined him to conclude the
match, and Cunegonde pressed him so strongly that he could not go from
his word. He consulted Pangloss, Martin, and the faithful Cacambo.
Pangloss drew up an excellent memorial, wherein he proved that the Baron
had no right over his sister, and that according to all the laws of the
empire, she might marry Candide with her left hand. Martin was for
throwing the Baron into the sea; Cacambo decided that it would be better
to deliver him up again to the captain of the galley, after which they
thought to send him back to the General Father of the Order at Rome by
the first ship. This advice was well received, the old woman approved
it; they said not a word to his sister; the thing was executed for a
little money, and they had the double pleasure of entrapping a Jesuit,
and punishing the pride of a German baron.

It is natural to imagine that after so many disasters Candide married,
and living with the philosopher Pangloss, the philosopher Martin, the
prudent Cacambo, and the old woman, having besides brought so many
diamonds from the country of the ancient Incas, must have led a very
happy life. But he was so much imposed upon by the Jews that he had
nothing left except his small farm; his wife became uglier every day,
more peevish and unsupportable; the old woman was infirm and even more
fretful than Cunegonde. Cacambo, who worked in the garden, and took
vegetables for sale to Constantinople, was fatigued with hard work, and
cursed his destiny. Pangloss was in despair at not shining in some
German university. For Martin, he was firmly persuaded that he would be
as badly off elsewhere, and therefore bore things patiently. Candide,
Martin, and Pangloss sometimes disputed about morals and metaphysics.
They often saw passing under the windows of their farm boats full of
Effendis, Pashas, and Cadis, who were going into banishment to Lemnos,
Mitylene, or Erzeroum. And they saw other Cadis, Pashas, and Effendis
coming to supply the place of the exiles, and afterwards exiled in their
turn. They saw heads decently impaled for presentation to the Sublime
Porte. Such spectacles as these increased the number of their
dissertations; and when they did not dispute time hung so heavily upon
their hands, that one day the old woman ventured to say to them:

"I want to know which is worse, to be ravished a hundred times by negro
pirates, to have a buttock cut off, to run the gauntlet among the
Bulgarians, to be whipped and hanged at an _auto-da-f_, to be
dissected, to row in the galleys--in short, to go through all the
miseries we have undergone, or to stay here and have nothing to do?"

"It is a great question," said Candide.

This discourse gave rise to new reflections, and Martin especially
concluded that man was born to live either in a state of distracting
inquietude or of lethargic disgust. Candide did not quite agree to that,
but he affirmed nothing. Pangloss owned that he had always suffered
horribly, but as he had once asserted that everything went wonderfully
well, he asserted it still, though he no longer believed it.

What helped to confirm Martin in his detestable principles, to stagger
Candide more than ever, and to puzzle Pangloss, was that one day they
saw Paquette and Friar Girofle land at the farm in extreme misery. They
had soon squandered their three thousand piastres, parted, were
reconciled, quarrelled again, were thrown into gaol, had escaped, and
Friar Girofle had at length become Turk. Paquette continued her trade
wherever she went, but made nothing of it.

"I foresaw," said Martin to Candide, "that your presents would soon be
dissipated, and only make them the more miserable. You have rolled in
millions of money, you and Cacambo; and yet you are not happier than
Friar Girofle and Paquette."

"Ha!" said Pangloss to Paquette, "Providence has then brought you
amongst us again, my poor child! Do you know that you cost me the tip of
my nose, an eye, and an ear, as you may see? What a world is this!"

And now this new adventure set them philosophising more than ever.

In the neighbourhood there lived a very famous Dervish who was esteemed
the best philosopher in all Turkey, and they went to consult him.
Pangloss was the speaker.

"Master," said he, "we come to beg you to tell why so strange an animal
as man was made."

"With what meddlest thou?" said the Dervish; "is it thy business?"

"But, reverend father," said Candide, "there is horrible evil in this
world."

"What signifies it," said the Dervish, "whether there be evil or good?
When his highness sends a ship to Egypt, does he trouble his head
whether the mice on board are at their ease or not?"

"What, then, must we do?" said Pangloss.

"Hold your tongue," answered the Dervish.

"I was in hopes," said Pangloss, "that I should reason with you a little
about causes and effects, about the best of possible worlds, the origin
of evil, the nature of the soul, and the pre-established harmony."

At these words, the Dervish shut the door in their faces.

During this conversation, the news was spread that two Viziers and the
Mufti had been strangled at Constantinople, and that several of their
friends had been impaled. This catastrophe made a great noise for some
hours. Pangloss, Candide, and Martin, returning to the little farm, saw
a good old man taking the fresh air at his door under an orange bower.
Pangloss, who was as inquisitive as he was argumentative, asked the old
man what was the name of the strangled Mufti.

"I do not know," answered the worthy man, "and I have not known the name
of any Mufti, nor of any Vizier. I am entirely ignorant of the event you
mention; I presume in general that they who meddle with the
administration of public affairs die sometimes miserably, and that they
deserve it; but I never trouble my head about what is transacting at
Constantinople; I content myself with sending there for sale the fruits
of the garden which I cultivate."

Having said these words, he invited the strangers into his house; his
two sons and two daughters presented them with several sorts of sherbet,
which they made themselves, with Kaimak enriched with the candied-peel
of citrons, with oranges, lemons, pine-apples, pistachio-nuts, and Mocha
coffee unadulterated with the bad coffee of Batavia or the American
islands. After which the two daughters of the honest Mussulman perfumed
the strangers' beards.

"You must have a vast and magnificent estate," said Candide to the Turk.

"I have only twenty acres," replied the old man; "I and my children
cultivate them; our labour preserves us from three great
evils--weariness, vice, and want."

Candide, on his way home, made profound reflections on the old man's
conversation.

"This honest Turk," said he to Pangloss and Martin, "seems to be in a
situation far preferable to that of the six kings with whom we had the
honour of supping."

"Grandeur," said Pangloss, "is extremely dangerous according to the
testimony of philosophers. For, in short, Eglon, King of Moab, was
assassinated by Ehud; Absalom was hung by his hair, and pierced with
three darts; King Nadab, the son of Jeroboam, was killed by Baasa; King
Ela by Zimri; Ahaziah by Jehu; Athaliah by Jehoiada; the Kings
Jehoiakim, Jeconiah, and Zedekiah, were led into captivity. You know how
perished Croesus, Astyages, Darius, Dionysius of Syracuse, Pyrrhus,
Perseus, Hannibal, Jugurtha, Ariovistus, Csar, Pompey, Nero, Otho,
Vitellius, Domitian, Richard II. of England, Edward II., Henry VI.,
Richard III., Mary Stuart, Charles I., the three Henrys of France, the
Emperor Henry IV.! You know----"

"I know also," said Candide, "that we must cultivate our garden."

"You are right," said Pangloss, "for when man was first placed in the
Garden of Eden, he was put there _ut operaretur eum_, that he might
cultivate it; which shows that man was not born to be idle."

"Let us work," said Martin, "without disputing; it is the only way to
render life tolerable."

The whole little society entered into this laudable design, according to
their different abilities. Their little plot of land produced plentiful
crops. Cunegonde was, indeed, very ugly, but she became an excellent
pastry cook; Paquette worked at embroidery; the old woman looked after
the linen. They were all, not excepting Friar Girofle, of some service
or other; for he made a good joiner, and became a very honest man.

Pangloss sometimes said to Candide:

"There is a concatenation of events in this best of all possible worlds:
for if you had not been kicked out of a magnificent castle for love of
Miss Cunegonde: if you had not been put into the Inquisition: if you had
not walked over America: if you had not stabbed the Baron: if you had
not lost all your sheep from the fine country of El Dorado: you would
not be here eating preserved citrons and pistachio-nuts."

"All that is very well," answered Candide, "but let us cultivate our
garden."




FOOTNOTES:

[1] P. 2. The name Pangloss is derived from two Greek words signifying
"all" and "language."

[2] P. 8. The Abares were a tribe of Tartars settled on the shores of
the Danube, who later dwelt in part of Circassia.

[3] P. 15. Venereal disease was said to have been first brought from
Hispaniola, in the West Indies, by some followers of Columbus who were
later employed in the siege of Naples. From this latter circumstance it
was at one time known as the Neapolitan disease.

[4] P. 19. The great earthquake of Lisbon happened on the first of
November, 1755.

[5] P. 20. Such was the aversion of the Japanese to the Christian faith
that they compelled Europeans trading with their islands to trample on
the cross, renounce all marks of Christianity, and swear that it was not
their religion. See chap. xi. of the voyage to Laputa in Swift's
_Gulliver's Travels_.

[6] P. 23. This _auto-da-f_ actually took place, some months after the
earthquake, on June 20, 1756.

[7] P. 23. The rejection of bacon convicting them, of course, of being
Jews, and therefore fitting victims for an _auto-da-f_.

[8] P. 24. The _San-benito_ was a kind of loose over-garment painted
with flames, figures of devils, the victim's own portrait, etc., worn by
persons condemned to death by the Inquisition when going to the stake on
the occasion of an _auto-da-f_. Those who expressed repentance for
their errors wore a garment of the same kind covered with flames
directed downwards, while that worn by Jews, sorcerers, and renegades
bore a St. Andrew's cross before and behind.

[9] P. 26. "This Notre-Dame is of wood; every year she weeps on the day
of her _fte_, and the people weep also. One day the preacher, seeing a
carpenter with dry eyes, asked him how it was that he did not dissolve
in tears when the Holy Virgin wept. 'Ah, my reverend father,' replied
he, 'it is I who refastened her in her niche yesterday. I drove three
great nails through her behind; it is then she would have wept if she
had been able.'"--Voltaire, _Mlanges_.

[10] P. 42. The following posthumous note of Voltaire's was first added
to M. Beuchot's edition of his works issued in 1829; "See the extreme
discretion of the author; there has not been up to the present any Pope
named Urban X.; he feared to give a bastard to a known Pope. What
circumspection! What delicacy of conscience!" The last Pope Urban was
the eighth, and he died in 1644.

[11] P. 45. Muley-Ismael was Emperor of Morocco from 1672 to 1727, and
was a notoriously cruel tyrant.

[12] P. 47. "Oh, what a misfortune to be an eunuch!"

[13] P. 48. Carlo Broschi, called Farinelli, an Italian singer, born at
Naples in 1705, without being exactly Minister, governed Spain under
Ferdinand VI.; he died in 1782. He has been made one of the chief
persons in one of the comic operas of MM. Auber and Scribe.

[14] P. 53. Jean Robeck, a Swede, who was born in 1672, will be found
mentioned in Rousseau's _Nouvelle Hlose_. He drowned himself in the
Weser at Bremen in 1729, and was the author of a Latin treatise on
voluntary death, first printed in 1735.

[15] P. 60. A spontoon was a kind of half-pike, a military weapon
carried by officers of infantry and used as a medium for signalling
orders to the regiment.

[16] P. 64. Later Voltaire substituted the name of the Father Croust for
that of Didrie. Of Croust he said in the _Dictionnaire Philosophique_
that he was "the most brutal of the Society."

[17] P. 68. By the _Journal of Trevoux_ Voltaire meant a critical
periodical printed by the Jesuits at Trevoux under the title of
_Mmoires pour servir  l'Historie des Sciences et des Beaux-Arts_. It
existed from 1701 until 1767, during which period its title underwent
many changes.

[18] P. 76. It has been suggested that Voltaire, in speaking of red
sheep, referred to the llama, a South American ruminant allied to the
camel. These animals are sometimes of a reddish colour, and were notable
as pack-carriers and for their fleetness.

[19] P. 78. The first English translator curiously gives "a tourene of
bouilli that weighed two hundred pounds," as the equivalent of "_un
contour bouilli qui pesait deux cent livres_." The French editor of the
1869 reprint points out that the South American vulture, or condor, is
meant; the name of this bird, it may be added, is taken from "_cuntur_,"
that given it by the aborigines.

[20] P. 90. Spanish half-crowns.

[21] P. 99. _Socinians_; followers of the teaching of Lalius and Faustus
Socinus (16th century), which denied the doctrine of the Trinity, the
deity of Christ, the personality of the devil, the native and total
depravity of man, the vicarious atonement and eternal punishment. The
Socinians are now represented by the Unitarians. _Manicheans_; followers
of Manes or Manichus (3rd century), a Persian who maintained that there
are two principles, the one good and the other evil, each equally
powerful in the government of the world.

[22] P. 107. In the 1759 editions, in place of the long passage in
brackets from here to page 215, there was only the following: "'Sir,'
said the Perigordian Abb to him, 'have you noticed that young person
who has so roguish a face and so fine a figure? You may have her for ten
thousand francs a month, and fifty thousand crowns in diamonds.' 'I have
only a day or two to give her,' answered Candide, 'because I have a
rendezvous at Venice.' In the evening after supper the insinuating
Perigordian redoubled his politeness and attentions."

[23] P. 108. The play referred to is supposed to be "Le Comte d'Essex,"
by Thomas Corneille.

[24] P. 108. In France actors were at one time looked upon as
excommunicated persons, not worthy of burial in holy ground or with
Christian rites. In 1730 the "honours of sepulture" were refused to
Mademoiselle Lecouvreur (doubtless the Miss Monime of this passage).
Voltaire's miscellaneous works contain a paper on the matter.

[25] P. 109. lie-Catherine Frron was a French critic (1719-1776) who
incurred the enmity of Voltaire. In 1752 Frron, in _Lettres sur
quelques crits du temps_, wrote pointedly of Voltaire as one who chose
to be all things to all men, and Voltaire retaliated by references such
as these in _Candide_.

[26] P. 111. Gabriel Gauchat (1709-1779), French ecclesiastical writer,
was author of a number of works on religious subjects.

[27] P. 112. Nicholas Charles Joseph Trublet (1697-1770) was a French
writer whose criticism of Voltaire was revenged in passages such as this
one in _Candide_, and one in the _Pauvre Diable_ beginning:

    L'abb Trublet avait alors le rage
    D'tre  Paris un petit personage.

[28] P. 120. Damiens, who attempted the life of Louis XV. in 1757, was
born at Arras, capital of Artois (Atrbatie).

[29] P. 120. On May 14, 1610, Ravaillac assassinated Henry VI.

[30] P. 120. On December 27, 1594, Jean Chtel attempted to assassinate
Henry IV.

[31] P. 122. This same curiously inept criticism of the war which cost
France her American provinces occurs in Voltaire's _Memoirs_, wherein he
says, "In 1756 England made a piratical war upon France for some acres
of snow." See also his _Prcis du Sicle de Louis_ XV.

[32] P. 123. Admiral Byng was shot on March 14, 1757.

[33] P. 129. Commenting upon this passage, M. Sarcey says admirably:
"All is there! In those ten lines Voltaire has gathered all the griefs
and all the terrors of these creatures; the picture is admirable for its
truth and power! But do you not feel the pity and sympathy of the
painter? Here irony becomes sad, and in a way an avenger. Voltaire cries
out with horror against the society which throws some of its members
into such an abyss. He has his 'Bartholomew' fever; we tremble with him
through contagion."

[34] P. 142. The following particulars of the six monarchs may prove not
uninteresting. Achmet III. (_b._ 1673, _d._ 1739) was dethroned in 1730.
Ivan VI. (_b._ 1740, _d._ 1762) was dethroned in 1741. Charles Edward
Stuart, the Pretender (_b._ 1720, _d._ 1788). Auguste III. (_b._ 1696,
_d._ 1763). Stanislaus (_b._ 1682, _d._ 1766). Theodore (_b._ 1690, _d._
1755). It will be observed that, although quite impossible for the six
kings ever to have met, five of them might have been made to do so
without any anachronism.

[35] P. 149. Franois Leopold Ragotsky (1676-1735).

       *       *       *       *       *

    +------------------------------------------------------------+
    | Typographical errors corrected in text:                    |
    |                                                            |
    | Page xiv: Chapter XIII heading in Table of Contents        |
    | amended to match chapter heading on page 54.               |
    | Page 2: metaphysicotheo-logico-cosmolo-nigology            |
    | amended to metaphysico-theologico-cosmolo-nigology.        |
    | Page 158: Liebnitz amended to Leibnitz.                    |
    | Page 168: perserved amended to preserved.                  |
    | Page 172: rougish amended to roguish; crows amended to     |
    | crowns.                                                    |
    |                                                            |
    | Where there is an equal number of instances of a word      |
    | being hyphenated and unhyphenated, both versions           |
    | of the word have been retained: dung-hill/dunghill;        |
    | and new-comers/newcomers.                                  |
    |                                                            |
    | A single footnote on page 90 has been moved                |
    | to the endnotes, and the notes numbers re-indexed. A       |
    | page reference was added to the moved footnote to          |
    | match the format of other endnotes.                        |
    |                                                            |
    | Modern Library blurb: "mail complete list of titles" left  |
    | as is.                                                     |
    |                                                            |
    | There are two instances of Massa Carara (pp. 43 and 45)    |
    | and one instance of Massa-Carrara (page ix). As this       |
    | latter is in the Introduction, i.e. distinct from the book |
    | proper, it has been retained.                              |
    |                                                            |
    | The different spellings of Cungonde (which occurs only    |
    | in the Introduction) and Robeck (which occurs in the       |
    | Notes [p. 170]; spelt Robek in the text [p. 53]) have      |
    | been retained for the same reason.                         |
    |                                                            |
    +------------------------------------------------------------+

       *       *       *       *       *
</article>
<article name="Dorian Grayn muotokuva">
DORIAN GRAYN MUOTOKUVA

Kirj.

Oscar Wilde



Englannin kielest suomensi Helmi Setl



WSOY, Porvoo, 1906.

Malmstrm'in kirjapaino, Kuopio.






ESIPUHE.


Taiteilija on kauniin luoja.

Taiteen ilmisaattaminen ja taiteilijan salaaminen -- se on taiteen
tarkoitusper.

Arvostelija on se, joka kykenee siirtmn sen vaikutuksen, mink kaunis
hneen tekee, toiseen tyyliin ja toiseen aineesen.

Sek korkein ett alhaisin arvostelun muoto on tavallaan itsebiografiaa.

Se, joka huomaa vain ruman tarkoituksen kauniissa, on turmeltunut
olematta viehttv. Se on vika.

Se, joka huomaa kauniin tarkoituksen kauniissa, on sivistynyt. Hnest
on toivoa.

Ne ovat valitut, joille kaunis merkitsee vain kauneutta.

Siveellisi tai siveettmi kirjoja ei ole olemassa. Kirjat ovat joko
hyvin tai huonosti kirjoitettuja. Siin kaikki.

Yhdeksnnentoista vuosisadan vastenmielisyys realismia kohtaan on
Calibanin raivoa tmn nhdess omat kasvonsa kuvastimessa.

Yhdeksnnentoista vuosisadan vastenmielisyys romantiikkaa kohtaan on
Calibanin raivoa, kun tm ei kohtaa omaa kuvasintaan peilin pinnassa.

Ihmisen moraalinen elm muodostaa osan taiteilijan aihetta, mutta
taiteen moraali on siin, ett tysin hallitsee eptydellist
vlikappaletta.

Ei kukaan taiteilija tahdo nytt mitn toteen. Totuuttakin voi
nytt toteen.

Taiteilijalla ei ole eetillisi sympatioja. Taiteilijan eetillinen
sympatia on anteeksiantamatonta tyylin manerimaisuutta.

Taiteilija ei ole koskaan sairaalloinen. Taiteilija voi ilmaista
kaikkea.

Ajatus ja kieli ovat taiteilijan taiteen tykaluja.

Pahe ja hyve ovat taiteilijalle taiteen ainesta.

Muodon kannalta on sveltaide kaikkien taiteiden tyyppin. Tunteen
kannalta on nyttelijn taide tyyppin.

Kaikki taide on samalla pintaa ja symbolia.

Se, joka tunkeutuu pinnan alle, tekee sen omalla uhallaan.

Se, joka yritt symbolia selitt, tekee sen omalla uhallaan.

Todellisuudessa taide kuvastaakin katselijaa eik elm.

Erilaiset mielipiteet taideteoksesta osoittavat, ett teos on uusi,
monipuolinen ja elv.

Jos arvostelut kyvt eri suuntiin, niin taiteilija on sopusoinnussa
itsens kanssa.

Me voimme antaa anteeksi ihmiselle, joka on keksinyt jonkun hydyllisen
esineen, niin kauan kuin hn ei itse sit ihaile. Ainoa puolustus
hydyttmn esineen luomiselle on se, ett itse ihailee sit
rajattomasti.

Kaikki taide on aivan hydytnt.

_Oscar Wilde_.




LUKU I.


Atelieri oli tynn ruusujen tuoksua, ja kun keve kestuuli suhahti
puutarhan puissa, niin tunkeutui huumaava sireenien haju tai
punakukkaisen orjantappuran vieno tuoksu avonaisen oven kautta sisn
huoneesen.

Persialaisen sohvansa nurkkauksesta, miss tapansa oli loikoilla ja
poltella paperossi toisensa jlkeen, lordi Henry Wotton saattoi
vilahdukselta nhd hunajalta tuoksuvan ja hunajanvrisen
kultavihmapensaan, jonka taipuvat oksat vaivoin jaksoivat kantaa
kullanhohteista taakkaansa. Sillointllin lentvien lintujen
aaveentapaiset varjot kuvastuivat leveitten ikkunoiden silkkiuutimille,
loihtien hetkeksi esiin japanilaisen svyn, ja johtaen hnen ajatuksensa
noihin Tokion kalpeakasvoisiin taiteilijoihin, jotka liikkumattoman
taiteen vlityksell koettavat saada esille liikkeen ja elon
vaikutuksen. Mehiliset, piileskellessn pitkss, niittmttmss
heinss tai kierrellessn keltaisten, plyisten kuusamakukkien
ymprill, tekivt yksitoikkoisella surinallaan hiljaisuuden vielkin
painostavammaksi. Ja hillitty humina Lontoosta kuului iknkuin
kaukaisten urkujen alimmalta svelelt.

Keskell huonetta staflialla oli muotokuva, joka esitti tavattoman
kaunista nuorta miest koko koossa, ja kuvan edess, jonkun matkaa
siit, istui taiteilija itse, Basil Hallward, jonka killinen katoaminen
muutamia vuosia sitten hertti yleist hmmstyst ja antoi aihetta
ihmeellisiin arveluihin.

Kun taiteilija katseli tuota miellyttv ja komeaa kuvaa, jota hnen
taiteensa niin nerokkaasti kuvasi, niin tyytyvinen hymyily valaisi
hetkeksi hnen kasvojansa. Mutta kki hn hyphti yls ja suljettuaan
silmns painoi sormensa silmluomiaan vasten, iknkuin yritten
pidtt ihmeellist unta, josta hn pelksi voivansa hert.

"Tuo on sinun paras teoksesi, Basil, parasta mit koskaan olet
maalannut", sanoi lordi Henry vitkalleen. "Sinun pit lhett se
Grosvenor-nyttelyyn ensi vuonna. Akademian nyttely on liian suuri ja
kehno. Joka kerta siell kydessni on siell ollut niin paljon ihmisi,
etten ole voinut nhd kuvia, ja se oli inhottavaa, tai niin paljon
kuvia, etten ole voinut nhd ihmisi, mik on vielkin pahempi.
Grosvenor on todellakin ainoa sopiva paikka."

"En luullakseni pane sit yhtn nytteille", hn vastasi, ja heitti
ptn taaksepin omituisella tavalla, jolle jo Oxfordissa hnen
ystvns olivat nauraneet. "Ei, en min huoli panna sit nytteille."

Lordi Henry kohotti kulmakarvojaan ja katsoi hneen ihmeissn hienojen,
sinertvien savurenkaiden lpi, jotka kohosivat kummallisissa
kiemuroissa hnen vkevst opiumipaperossistaan. "Etk panisi sit
laisinkaan nytteille? Mutta, rakas ystv, mink vuoksi? Onko sinulla
minknlaista syyt siihen? Olettepa te maalarit ihmeellisi otuksia! Te
teette vaikka mit saavuttaaksenne mainetta, ja niin pian kuin olette
sen saavuttanut, niin te nyttte haluavan heitt sen luotanne. Siin
te teette hyvin tyhmsti. Sill jos kohta on paha jos meist puhutaan,
niin viel paljoa pahempi, jollei kukaan meist puhu. Tllainen
muotokuva kohottaisi sinut Englannissa ylpuolelle kaikkia muita nuoria
miehi ja saattaisi vanhat kadehtimaan sinua, jos vanhoilla ihmisill
yleens voi olla minknlaisia tunteita."

"Min tiedn ett naurat minulle", vastasi toinen, "mutta en todellakaan
voi asettaa sit nytteille. Olen pannut tuohon tauluun liiaksi omaa
itseni."

Lordi Henry ojentautui pitkkseen sohvalle ja nauroi.

"Niin, tiesinhn ett nauraisit; mutta se on sittenkin aivan totta."

"Liiaksi omaa itsesi! Totta tosiaan, Basil, en tiennyt ett olisit niin
turhamainen. Sit paitsi en ymmrr mit yhtlisyytt voisi olla sinun
karkeapiirteisten kasvojesi ja pikimustan tukkasi ja tuon nuoren
Adoniksen vlill, joka nytt iknkuin norsunluusta ja ruusunlehdist
tehdylt. Ei, rakas Basil, tuo tuossa on Narcissus ja sin -- no niin,
sinun kasvoissasi tietysti on nerokas ilme ja niin poispin. Mutta
kauneus, todellinen kauneus -- se loppuu siin, miss nerokas ilme
alkaa. Nerokkaisuus on itsessn jonkunlaista liioittelua ja se rikkoo
aina sopusoinnun kasvoissa. Heti kun ihminen rupeaa ajattelemaan, ovat
hnen kasvonsa yksinomaan nen, tai yksinomaan otsaa tai jotain muuta
hirve. Tarkastappa vain miehi, jotka jollakin oppialalla ovat
saavuttaneet menestyst. Kuinka kerrassaan hirvittvi he ovat. Kirkon
miehet tietysti ovat poikkeuksia. Sill kirkon piiriss ei ajatella.
Kahdeksankymmenvuotias piispa toistaa sanasta sanaan samaa, kuin mit
hnelle kahdeksantoista vanhana opetettiin, ja luonnollisena seurauksena
on se, ett hn silytt miellyttvn ulkomuotonsa. Sinun salaperinen
ystvsi, jonka nime et ole koskaan minulle maininnut, mutta jonka
muotokuva on minut suorastaan lumonnut, ei koskaan ajattele. Min olen
siit aivan varma. Hn on aivoton, kaunis olento, jonka pitisi aina
talvisin olla tll meidn katseltavanamme, jolloin meill ei ole
kukkasia, ja aina kesisin, jotta meill olisi jotain, jolla
nerokkuuttamme jhdyttisimme. l huoli imarrella itsesi, Basil. Et
ole laisinkaan hnen nkisens."

"Sin et ymmrr minua, Harry", vastasi taiteilija. "Tietystikn en ole
hnen nkisens. Tiedn sen vallan hyvin. Olisipa se surkeata jos
olisin hnen nkisens. Sin kohautat olkapitsi? Min puhun tytt
totta. Kaikkia ruumiillisia ja henkisi etuja vainoo kova kohtalo,
sellainen kova onni, joka kautta historian nytt seuraavan kuninkaiden
hapuilevia askelia. Ei ole hyv erota liiaksi muista ihmisist. Rumilla
ja typerill on paras olo tss maailmassa. He voivat istua rauhassa ja
katsella maailman menoa. Jos voitto onkin heille vierasta, niin
sstyyp heilt mys masennuksen tuska. He elvt niinkuin kaikkien
tulisi el, hiritsemttmss rauhassa, vlipitmttmin ja
huolettomina. He eivt tuota turmiota muille, eivtk itse turmellu.
Sin, Harry, saat krsi rikkautesi ja asemasi vuoksi, min kykyni ja
taiteeni vuoksi -- mink arvoisia ne sitte lienevtkin -- Dorian Gray
kauneutensa vuoksi -- kaikki me saamme krsi siit, mink jumalat
meille ovat antaneet, hirvesti krsi."

"Dorian Gray? Sek on hnen nimens?" kysyi lordi Henry, astuen
atelierin poikki Basil Hallwardia kohti.

"Se on hnen nimens. Minun tarkoitukseni ei ollut ilmaista sit
sinulle."

"Mutta mink vuoksi?"

"Ah, en min voi sit selitt. Kun olen oikein kiintynyt johonkin
ihmiseen, niin en koskaan mainitse hnen nimens kellekn. Siten
iknkuin luovuttaisin osan hnest muille. Min olen oppinut
rakastamaan salaperisyytt. Sen kautta vain minun luullakseni
nykyaikainen elm voi tuntua meist mystilliselt ja ihmeelliselt.
Jokapivisinkin asia voi olla hurmaava, jos sit vain pit salassa.
Kun min lhden kaupungista, niin en koskaan kerro kellekn, minne
menen. Jos sanoisin, niin koko huvini katoaisi. Se on ehk paha tapa,
mutta sen johdosta elm tulee koko joukon huvittavammaksi. Sinun
mielestsi varmaan min olen kovin hupsu?"

"Et ensinkn", vastasi lordi Henry, "et ensinkn, rakas Basil. Sin
nyt unohtavan ett min olen naimisissa, ja avioliiton suurin viehtys
on siin, ett kummankin on pakko teeskennell. Min en koskaan tied,
miss minun vaimoni on, eik minun vaimoni tied, mit min teen. Kun me
tapaamme toisemme -- joskus sattumalta me kohtaamme toisemme,
sydessmme yhdess ulkona pivllist tai mennessmme herttuan luo --
niin me kerromme toisillemme aivan vakavasti mit mahdottomimpia
juttuja. Minun vaimoni on siin suhteessa hyvin kekselis -- paljoa
taitavampi tosiaankin kuin min. Hn ei koskaan erehdy pivist, mik
minulle aina tapahtuu. Mutta kun hn huomaa minun erehtyneen, niin hn
ei koskaan nosta siit melua. Joskus min toivoisin hnen sit tekevn;
mutta hn vain nauraa minulle."

"Minua inhottaa se tapa, mill sin puhut avioliitostasi, Harry", sanoi
Basil Hallward, astuen puutarhaan johtavaa ovea kohti. "Min luulen ett
sin olet oikein hyv aviomies, mutta ett sin hpet omia hyveitsi.
Sin olet merkillinen ihminen. Sin et koskaan sano mitn siveellist,
etk tee koskaan mitn vr. Sinun kyynillisyytesi on vain
teeskennelty."

"Luonnollisuuskin on teeskentely, ja ikvint laadultaan mit min
tiedn", huudahti lordi Henry nauraen; ja molemmat nuoret miehet menivt
yhdess puutarhaan, ja kvivt istumaan pitklle bambusohvalle, joka oli
korkean laakeripuun varjossa. Auringonsteet hyvilivt kiiltvi
lehvi. Ruohikossa valkoiset tuhatkaunot vrhtelivt.

Hetken kuluttua lordi Henry veti kellonsa esille.

"Luulenpa, ett minun on pakko lhte, Basil", hn mutisi, "mutta
ennenkuin lhden, tahtoisin mielellni saada vastauksen siihen
kysymykseen, jonka vastikn sinulle tein."

"Mihink kysymykseen?" sanoi maalari, silmt maahan luotuina.

"Sen sin tiedt varsin hyvin."

"En min tied, Henry."

"No, sanon sen sitten sinulle. Min tahdon tiet, miksi et tahdo panna
Dorian Grayn muotokuvaa nytteille. Min tahdon tiet oikean syyn."

"Min jo sanoin sinulle oikean syyn."

"Et, sin et sanonut. Sin sanoit vain ett siin oli liiaksi omaa
itsesi. No, tuo on lapsekasta."

"Harry", sanoi Basil Hallward katsoen hnt suoraan silmiin, "kaikki
muotokuvat, joissa on tunnetta, kuvaavat maalaria eik mallia. Malli on
vain vaikutin, sattuma. Taiteilija ei kuvaa mallia, vaan pikemmin
kiinnitt oman itsens kankaalle. Syy, miksi en tahdo asettaa tt
kuvaa nytteille on se, ett pelkn ilmaisseeni siin oman sieluni
salaisuuden."

Lordi Henry nauroi. "Ja mik se on?" hn kysyi.

"Min kerron sinulle", sanoi Hallward; mutta hnen kasvonsa ilmaisivat
killist hmmennyst.

"Min olen sulana korvana, Basil", jatkoi hnen toverinsa vilkaisten
hneen.

"Ah, ei siit ole paljon sanottavaa, Harry", vastasi maalari. "Ja minp
pelkn ettet sin sit ymmrr. Ehkp et edes sit uskokkaan."

Lordi Henry hymyili ja kumartuen alas hn taittoi vaaleanpunaisen
tuhatkaunon ja tarkasteli sit. "Min luulen aivan varmaan sit
ymmrtvni", hn vastasi katsellen tarkasti kukan kultaisia emlehti,
"ja mit uskomiseen tulee, niin voin uskoa mit hyvns, jos se on vain
hiukankin uskottavaa."

Tuuli karisteli muutamia kukkasia puista, ja sireenien raskaat tertut
keinuivat hiljalleen helteisess ilmassa. Heinsirkka siritteli
muuriaidan kyljess ja kevyt sudenkorento lehahti ohitse kuin sininen
nauha harsomaisten siipiens varassa. Lordi Henry oli kuulevinaan Basil
Hallwardin sydmen sykkivn ja odotti ihmeissn, mit hn saisi kuulla.

"Juttu on aivan yksinkertaisesti tllainen", sanoi maalari hetken
kuluttua. "Kaksi kuukautta sitten vietin iltaa lady Brandonin luona.
Tiedthn ett meidn taiteilija parkojen tytyy nyttyty seuroissa
aika-ajoin, jotta ihmiset eivt luulisi meit villeiksi. Frakissa ja
valkoisessa kaulahuivissa, niinkuin vastikn sanoit minulle, voi
jokainen, vielp pankkihuijarikin, saavuttaa sivistyneen maineen. No
niin, oltuani siell kymmenen minuuttia, ja keskusteltuani prameilevien
leskien ja ikvien akademikkojen kanssa, min kki tunsin jonkun
katselevan minua. Min knnyin puoleksi taakseni ja nin ensi kertaa
Dorian Grayn. Kun meidn katseemme osuivat toisiinsa, niin min tunsin
kalpenevani. Kummallinen pelon tunne valtasi minut. Min tiesin
seisovani vastatusten henkiln kanssa, jonka personallisuus oli niin
tenhoava, ett jos antautuisin sen valtaan, niin se kokonaan hvittisi
minun olentoni, koko sieluni, koko taiteeni. En min halunnut ett
mikn ulkonainen voima vaikuttaisi minun elmni. Tiedthn itse,
Harry, kuinka itseninen min olen luonteeltani. Olen aina ollut oma
mestarini; olin se ainakin ollut siihen asti, kunnes tapasin Dorian
Grayn. Sitten -- mutta en tied miten sit sinulle selittisin. Olin
tuntevinani ett elmssni oli tapahtumaisillaan hirvittv
knnekohta. Minulla oli himme aavistus siit, ett kohtalo oli
varannut minulle tavattomia iloja mutta mys tavattomia suruja. Min
jouduin tuskan valtaan ja aioin lhte pois huoneesta. Omatunto ei minua
siihen vaatinut, vaan pikemmin jonkunmoinen pelkuruus. En tahdo kielt,
ett koetin pst pakoon."

"Omatunto ja pelkurimaisuus on oikeastaan aivan samaa, Basil. Omatunto
on vain toiminimi. Siin kaikki."

"Sit min en usko, Harry, enk usko sinunkaan sit uskovan. Vaan olkoot
minun vaikuttimeni mitk hyvns -- ehkp se oli ylpeytt, sill min
olin ennen hyvin ylpe -- joka tapauksessa min pyrin ovea kohti. Siell
min tietysti trmsin vasten lady Brandonia. 'Ette suinkaan aio
livahtaa pois nin varhain, mr. Hallward?' huudahti hn. Tunnethan sin
hnen kimakan nens?"

"Kyll; hn on riikinkukon kaltainen kaikessa muussa paitsi
kauneudessa", sanoi lordi Henry repien tuhatkaunon palasiksi pitkill
hermostuneilla sormillaan.

"Min en pssyt hnest eroon. Hn esitti minut ruhtinaille ja
kunnianarvoisille herroille, joiden rintoja kunniamerkit ja thdet
koristivat. Ja hn saattoi minut vanhanpuolisten naisten luo, joilla oli
koukkuiset kotkannent ja hiuksissa jttiliskoristeita. Hn puhui
minusta kuin parhaasta ystvstn. Olin tavannut hnet vain kerran
ennen, mutta hn oli saanut phns tehd minusta illan sankarin.
Luullakseni jokin minun tauluistani oli niihin aikoihin herttnyt
suurta huomiota, ainakin oli sit jauhettu sanomalehdiss, ja sehn on
kuolemattomuuden todistus yhdeksnnelltoista vuosisadalla. kki
seisoin vastatusten tuon nuoren miehen kanssa, jonka olento oli
saattanut minut niin omituisen kuohun valtaan. Me seisoimme aivan
lhetysten, melkein kiinni toisissamme. Meidn katseemme osuivat jlleen
toisiinsa. Min olin ajattelematon pyytessni lady Brandonia esittmn
itseni hnelle. Ehkp se ei sittenkn ollut vain ajattelemattomuutta.
Sit oli vain mahdoton vltt. Me olisimme puhutelleet toisiamme
esittelyttkin. Olen siit aivan varma. Dorian sanoi sen minulle
jljestpin. Hnkin tunsi, ett kohtalo oli vienyt meidt yhteen."

"Ja miten lady Brandon esitti tt ihmeellist nuorta miest?" kysyi
hnen toverinsa. "Min tiedn ett hnell on tapana muutamin sanoin
kuvata kaikkia vieraitaan. Muistan, kuinka hn kerran saattoi minut
ern vanhan, hirven, punakan herran luo, jonka rinta oli kokonaan
kunniamerkkien ja nauhojen peitossa, ja kuinka hn juhlallisen
intomielisesti kuiskasi minun korvaani mit ihmeellisimpi juttuja niin
kovalla nell ett kaikki huoneessa ne varmaan kuulivat. Min
suorastaan lksin pakoon. Tahdon itse ottaa selkoa ihmisist. Mutta lady
Brandon kohtelee vieraitaan aivan samalla tavalla kuin huutokauppias
tavaroitaan. Hn joko kehuu heit tolkuttomasti tai kertoo heist
kaikkea muuta kuin mit haluaisi heist tiet."

"Lady Brandon parka! Sin arvostelet hnt kovin ankarasti, Harry!"
sanoi Hallward vlinpitmttmsti.

"Rakas ystv, hn koetti perustaa salongin, mutta siit syntyikin vain
ravintola. Mitenk min voisin ihailla hnt? Mutta kerroppa mit hn
sanoi mr. Dorian Grayst?"

"Ah, jotakin sentapaista kuin 'erinomainen poika -- hnen iti parkansa
ja min olimme aivan eroamattomia. Kerrassaan unohtanut, mik toimi
hnell on -- pelknp -- ettei hnell olekkaan mitn tointa -- ah,
tosiaankin, hn soittaa pianoa -- vai viuluako, rakas mr. Gray?' Meidn
tytyi kummankin nauraa ja meist tuli heti ystvt."

"Naurulla ei aloiteta huonosti ystvyytt ja parhaiten sen sill
lopettaa", sanoi nuori lordi taittaen uuden tuhatkaunon.

Hallward pudisti ptn. "Sin et ymmrr mit ystvyys on, Harry",
mutisi hn -- "etk myskn vihamielisyytt. Sin pidt kaikista
ihmisist; se on, sin et vlit kestn."

"Sin arvostelet minua hyvin vrin!" huudahti lordi Henry, tynten
hatun niskaan ja katsellen pilvi, jotka kulkivat iknkuin
sotkeentuneet valkoiset silkkivyyhdet kirkkaansinisell taivaalla. "Niin
tosiaankin, hyvin vrin. Min teen suuren eron ihmisten vlill. Min
valitsen ystvni heidn kauniin ulkomuotonsa, tuttavani heidn hyvien
luonteenominaisuuksiensa ja viholliseni heidn tervn jrkens vuoksi.
Ihminen ei voi kyllin suurella huolella valita vihollisiansa. Minun
vihollisistani ei ole ainoakaan narri. He ovat kaikki lahjakkaita
henkilit ja sen vuoksi he kaikki panevat minuun arvoa. Onko tuo hyvin
itserakasta? Luullakseni se on hiukan itserakasta."

"Onpa minunkin mielestni, Harry. Mutta sinun luokittelusi mukaan min
olisin vain sinun tuttavasi."

"Rakas, vanha Basil, sin olet paljoa enemmn kuin tuttava minulle."

"Ja paljoa vhemmn kuin ystv. Jonkunmoinen veli, luullakseni?"

"Ah, veljet! En min veljist vlit. Minun vanhempi veljeni ei tahdo
kuolla, ja minun nuoremmat veljeni eivt nyt koskaan muuta tekevn."

"Harry!" huudahti Hallward rypisten kulmakarvojaan.

"Rakas ystv, en min puhunut aivan tosissani. Mutta min en voi sille
mitn, ett inhoan sukulaisiani. Luullakseni syy on siin, ettei kukaan
meist voi krsi muissa samoja vikoja kuin itselln on. Min ksitn
erittin hyvin ett Englannin kansanvaltaiset vihaavat ylluokkien
paheita. Kansan suuri joukko tiet, ett juoppous, tylsmielisyys ja
siveettmyys ovat heidn erikoisominaisuuksiansa ja ett jos joku meist
tekeytyy narriksi, hn siten tunkeutuu heidn alallensa. Kun Southwark
raukka joutui avioerotuomioistuimen eteen, niin heidn paheksumisensa
oli kerrassaan suurenmoinen. Ja kuitenkaan en min usko, ett edes
kymmenen prosenttia alaluokasta el moitteettomasti."

"En hyvksy ainoatakaan sanaa mit sanot, Harry, ja sit paitsi tiedn
aivan varmaan ettet tarkoita myskn mit sanot."

Lordi Henry siveli ruskeaa suippopartaansa ja hakkasi veistellyll
ebenholtsikepilln kiiltonahkakenkns krke. "Kuinka aito
englantilainen sin olet, Basil! Jo toistamiseen sin teet tuon huomion.
Jos joku esitt jonkun aatteen jollekin aito englantilaiselle -- se on
aina hyvin ajattelematonta -- niin hnen mieleens ei koskaan
juolahdakkaan punnita, onko tuo aate oikea vai vr. Ei mikn muu ole
hnest trke kuin se, uskooko hn siihen itse. Olkoon menneeksi,
mutta aatteen arvo ei riipu vhintkn sen ihmisen rehellisyydest,
joka sen lausuu ilmi. Onpa luultavampaakin ett mit vhemmn rehellinen
ihminen on, sit henkisempi on itse aate, sill silloin siin ei ole
hnen omien tarpeittensa, halujensa ja ennakkoluulojensa vrityst.
Mutta min en halua vitell sinun kanssasi valtiollisista,
yhteiskunnallisista enk metafyysillisist asioista. Ihmiset ovat
minulle mieluisammat kuin periaatteet ja periaatteettomat ihmiset
paremmat kuin mikn muu maailmassa. Kerro minulle enemmn mr. Dorian
Grayst. Kuinka usein sin tapaat hnt?"

"Joka piv. En olisi onnellinen, jollen nkisi hnt joka piv. Hn on
kerrassaan vlttmtn minulle."

"Kuinka merkillist! Min luulin ettet koskaan vlittisi mistn muusta
kuin taiteesta."

"Hn on nykyn koko minun taiteeni", sanoi maalari vakavasti. "Minusta
tuntuu joskus, kuin maailman historiassa olisi vain kaksi trket
ajankohtaa. Ensiminen kun taiteessa keksitn uusi ilmaisukeino, toinen
kun taiteelle ilmestyy uusi personallisuus. Mit ljymaalauksen keksint
merkitsi venetsialaisille ja Antinous-p vanhoille kreikkalaisille,
sit Dorian Grayn kasvot kerran tulevat olemaan minulle. Min en vain
maalaa ja piirusta ja tee luonnoksia hnen mukaansa -- tietysti olen
kaikkea sitkin tehnyt -- vaan hn on minulle viel paljoa muutakin kuin
vain malli. En tahdo vitt, etten olisi tyytyvinen niihin kuviin,
joita hnest olen tehnyt, tai ett hnen kauneutensa laatu olisi
sellainen, ettei taide kykenisi sit kuvaamaan. Ei ole olemassa mitn,
mit taide ei voisi kuvata, ja min tiedn ett se ty, jota olen tehnyt
tutustuttuani Dorian Grayhin, on hyv tyt, parasta mit koskaan olen
tehnyt. Mutta jollakin kummallisella tavalla -- ihmettelen, tokko sin
voit ymmrt minua -- hnen personallisuutensa on vaikuttanut aivan
uuden tekotavan minun taiteeseni, aivan uuden tyylin. Min nen nyt
kaikki toisin, min ksitn kaikki toisin. Min voin nyt nauttia
elmst tavalla, jota ennen en ymmrtnyt. 'Kauneuden unelma aatteiden
maailmassa' -- kuka sen on sanonut? En muista; mutta sit Dorian Gray on
nyt minulle. Vain tuon pojan lsnolo -- sill minun mielestni hn on
vain poika, joskin hn on jo kolmannellakymmenell -- vain hnen
lsnolonsa -- ah! voitkohan sin ymmrt, mit se minulle merkitsee?
Tietmttn hn selvitt minulle uuden koulun suunnan, koulun, jossa
yht aikaa vallitsee romantillisen intohimon ja antiikin tydellisyyden
henki. Sielun ja ruumiin sopusointu -- mik suuruus siin! Me
lyhytnkisyydessmme olemme eroittaneet nuo kaksi ja keksineet
realismin, joka on trke, ja idealismin, joka on tyhj. Harry! jospa
tietisit, mit Dorian Gray minulle merkitsee! Muistathan tuota minun
maisemaani, josta Agnew tarjosi minulle niin suunnattoman hinnan, mutta
jota en sittenkn tahtonut myd? Se on minun parhaita taulujani. Ja
mink vuoksi? Siksi, ett minun maalatessani Dorian Gray istui
vieressni. Salaperinen voima virtasi hnest minuun, ja ensi kertaa
elissni nin min tuossa yksinkertaisessa metsmaisemassa sen ihmeen,
jota aina olin etsinyt ja aina kaivannut."

"Basil, se on ihmeellist! Minun tytyy saada nhd Dorian Gray."

Hallward nousi yls paikaltaan ja astui edestakaisin puutarhassa. Hetken
kuluttua hn palasi takaisin. "Harry", hn sanoi, "Dorian Gray ei ole
minulle muuta kuin taiteellinen aihe. Sin et ehk ne hness mitn.
Min nen hness kaikki. Hn ei ole koskaan enemmn lsn minun
tyssni, kuin silloin kun ei mitn kuvaa hnest ole siin. Niinkuin
jo sanoin hnen vaikutuksestansa olen saanut uuden tyylin. Min tunnen
hnen vaikutuksensa varsinkin muutamissa kaarevissa viivoissa ja
erityisiss hienoissa ja suloisissa vreiss. Siin kaikki."

"Miksi et siis aseta hnen kuvaansa nytteille?" kysyi lordi Henry.

"Senthden, ett tahtomattani olen pannut siihen tuota taiteellista
ihanteellisuutta, josta tietysti en koskaan ole huolinut hnelle puhua.
Hn ei tied siit mitn. Eik hn saa koskaan siit tietkkn
mitn. Mutta ihmiset voisivat arvata sen; ja min en tahdo paljastaa
sieluani heidn yksinkertaisille, uteliaille silmillens. He eivt saa
tarkastaa minun sydntni suurennuslasilla. Tuossa on liiaksi minua
itseni, Harry -- liiaksi itseni!"

"Runoilijat eivt ole yht arkoja kuin sin. He tietvt miten
tarpeellista on pst intohimoja julkisuuteen. Meidn aikanamme
murtunut sydn saavuttaa monta painosta".

"Sen vuoksi min vihaankin niit", huudahti Hallward. "Taiteilijan
tulisi luoda kauniita teoksia panematta niihin hituistakaan omaa
elmns. Me elmme aikakaudessa, jossa ihmiset kohtelevat taidetta,
iknkuin se olisi aiottu jonkunmoiseksi elmkerraksi. Me olemme
kadottaneet abstraktisen kauneuden aistin. Kerran min tahdon nytt
maailmalle, mit se on; ja siit syyst ei maailma koskaan saa nhd
Dorian Grayn muotokuvaa".

"Min luulen ett erehdyt, Basil, mutta en huoli kiistell kanssasi.
Ainoastaan se, joka henkisesti on mennyt hukkaan, alituisesti vittelee.
Sanoppa minulle, pitk Dorian Gray paljon sinusta?"

Maalari tuumi hetken aikaa. "Hn pit minusta", hn vastasi sitten;
"min tiedn ett hn on kiintynyt minuun. Tietysti min imartelen hnt
suuresti. Min tunnen erityist huvia, kun sanon hnelle sellaista, jota
tiedn jlkeenpin katuvani. Tavallisesti hn on hyvin ystvllinen
minulle, ja me istumme atelieriss ja juttelemme, me juttelemme
tuhansista asioista. Kuitenkin silloin-tllin hn on hirven
ajattelematon ja nytt olevan hyvillns kun hn voi kiusata minua.
Sill min tunnen, Harry, ett olen antanut koko sieluni ihmiselle, joka
kohtelee sit kuin napinlpe varten aiottua kukkaa, kuin kunniamerkki,
jonka tarkoituksena on tyydytt hnen turhamaisuuttaan, kuin
koristusta, joka kest vain yhden ainoan kesisen pivn."

"Kespivt, Basil, ovat pitki", mutisi lordi Henry. "Ehkp sin vsyt
pikemmin kuin hn. Se on surullinen kokemus, mutta varmaa on ett nero
on pitkikisempi kuin kauneus. Se selvitt sen tosiasian, ett me
kaikki kiusaamme itsemme liikasivistyksell. Kovassa olemassa-olon
taistelussa me tarvitsemme jotakin kestv, ja siksi me tytmme
aivomme turhilla asioilla ja tapahtumilla turhaan toivoen voivamme pit
paikkamme. Perusteellisesti sivistynyt mies -- kas siin uuden ajan
ihanne. Ja perusteellisesti sivistyneen miehen sielu on hirve. Se on
kuin markkinapuoti tynn huonoa ja ala-arvoista tavaraa. Mutta luulenpa
sittenkin ett sin vsyt ensin. Jonakuna pivn sin katselet
ystvsi, huomaatkin ettet voi hnt piirustaa, hnen vrins ei
miellyt sinua, tai jotakin muuta sen kaltaista. Sin moitit hnt ja
arvelet ett hn on kyttytynyt pahasti sinua kohtaan. Seuraavalla
kerralla hnen tullessaan sinun luoksesi, sin olet aivan kylm ja
vlipitmtn. Se on hyvin surullista, sill sen kautta sin muutut.
Sinun kertomuksesi on aivan kuin romaani, taiteen romaani, siksi sit
voisi sanoa. Mutta pahin seuraus kaikista romaaneista on se, ett ne
tekevt ihmiset niin epromantisiksi."

"Harry, l puhu tuolla tavalla. Niin kauan kuin eln, olen Dorian Grayn
personallisuuden vaikutuksen alainen. Sin et voi tuntea minun
tunteillani. Sin olet liian vaihtelevainen."

"Oi, rakas Basil, juuri sen vuoksi voinkin tuntea. Uskolliset sielut
tuntevat vain rakkauden jokapivisen puolen. Mutta uskottomat tuntevat
sen murhenytelmt." Ja lordi Henry sytytti tulitikun siron hopearasian
kyljest ja alkoi polttaa paperossia itsetietoisen ja tyytyvisen
nkisen, kuin hn olisi keskittnyt koko maailman tuohon lauseesensa.
Muratin kiiltvn vihreitten lehvien peitosta kuului kuhertavien
varpusten viserryst ja sinisten pilvien varjot kulkivat kuin joutsenet
ruohikon yli. Miten suloista oli olla puutarhassa! Ja miten huvittava
muitten ihmisten tunnemaailma! -- paljoa hauskempi kuin heidn
ajatuksensa, silt hnest ainakin tuntui. Oma sielunelm, sek
ystvien intohimot -- kas niiss elmn suurin viehtys. Hn ajatteli
itsekseen salaisesti myhillen sit ikv aamiaista, joka hnelt oli
mennyt hukkaan, sen vuoksi ett oli jnyt niin pitkksi aikaa Basil
Hallwardin luo. Jos hn olisi mennyt ttins luo, niin hn olisi varmaan
tavannut siell lordi Goodbodyn, ja keskustelu olisi yksinomaan
kosketellut kyhien ruokkimista sek malliasuinrakennusten
vlttmttmyytt. Kaikki olisivat saarnanneet niiden hyveiden
trkeydest, joita heill omassa elmssn ei ollut tarvetta
harjoittaa. Rikkaat olisivat puhuneet sstvisyyden hydyst ja
tyhjntoimittajat selittneet kaunopuheisesti tyn suurta arvoa. Kuinka
suloista pst tuota kaikkea pakoon! Muistellessaan tti ers ajatus
nytti juolahtavan hnen mieleens. Hn kntyi Hallwardin puoleen ja
sanoi: "Rakas ystv, nyt min muistan jotain."

"Mit sitten, Harry?"

"Miss olen kuullut Dorian Grayn nimen."

"Miss sitten?" kysyi Hallward rypisten hiukan kulmakarvojaan.

"l nyt niin kiselt, Basil. Se oli ttini, lady Agathan luona. Hn
kertoi keksineens ihmeellisen nuoren miehen, joka oli luvannut olla
hnen apunansa East Endiss, ja ett hnen nimens oli Dorian Gray.
Mutta minun tytyy list, ettei hn koskaan puhunut hnen
kauneudestansa. Naiset eivt pane mitn arvoa kauneuteen, ei ainakaan
hyvt naiset. Hn kertoi ett hn oli hyvin vakava ja hyvluontoinen.
Min nin hnet heti edessni silmlasit nenll, ohuttukkaisena, kasvot
tynn pisamoita ja tallustellen suurin jaloin. Olisin toivonut
tietneeni ett hn oli sinun ystvsi."

"Olen hyvin mielissni ettet sit tiennyt, Harry."

"Mink thden?"

"Min en halua ett sin tutustut hneen."

"Sin et halua ett min tutustuisin hneen?"

"En."

"Mr. Dorian Gray on atelieriss", ilmoitti palvelija, joka samassa tuli
puutarhaan.

"Sinun on nyt pakko esitt minut hnelle", sanoi lordi Henry nauraen.

Maalari kntyi palvelijan puoleen, joka seisoi aurinkoa vasten
siritten silmin. "Pyyd ett mr. Gray odottaa, Parker. Min tulen
aivan heti". Palvelija kumarsi ja poistui tiet pitkin.

Sitten hn silmsi lordi Henry. "Dorian Gray on minun rakkain
ystvni", hn sanoi. "Hn on luonteeltaan yksinkertainen ja herttainen.
Sinun ttisi arvosteli hnt aivan oikein. l pilaa hnt. l koeta
vaikuttaa hneen. Sinun vaikutuksesi ei olisi hyv. Maailma on avara ja
siin on monta ihmeellist olentoa. l riist minulta sit ainoata
henkil, joka antaa minun taiteelleni sen viehtyksen, joka sill on.
Minun elmni taiteilijana riippuu hnest. Muista, Harry, ett luotan
sinuun." Hn puhui hyvin hitaasti ja sanat tuntuivat puhkeavan esiin
hnen tahtomattansa.

"Mit hassutuksia sin loruat!" sanoi lordi Henry hymyillen, ja tarttuen
Hallwardia ksikynkst kiinni hn melkein talutti hnet sisn.




LUKU II.


Astuessaan sisn he nkivt Dorian Grayn. Tm istui pianon ress,
selin heihin ja selaili Schumannin lauluja. "Lainaa minulle nmt
laulut, Basil", hn sanoi. "Min tahtoisin tutustua niihin. Ne ovat
kerrassaan ihastuttavia."

"Se riippuu kokonaan siit, miten sin istut tnn, Dorian."

"Ah, min olen vsynyt istumaan mallina, enk min huoli koko kuvaa
itsestni", vastasi poika, kierten ylimielisesti ja kiivaasti
pianotuolin ympri. Kun hn huomasi lordi Henryn, niin hieno puna kohosi
hetkeksi hnen poskiinsa ja hn nousi yls. "Suo anteeksi, Basil, mutta
en tiennyt ett kukaan oli sinun seurassasi."

"Tm on lordi Henry Wotton, Dorian, vanha ystvni Oxfordin ajoilta.
Kerkesin juuri kertoa hnelle, mik mainio malli sin olet, ja nyt sin
pilasit kaikki."

"Ette ainakaan ole pilannut minun iloani saadessani tutustua teihin, mr.
Gray", sanoi lordi Henry, astuen eteenpin ja ojentaen ktens. "Ttini
on usein puhunut teist minulle. Te olette suuresti hnen suosiossansa,
ja pelknp samalla mys yksi hnen monista uhreistansa."

"Nykyn olen lady Agathan mustassa kirjassa", vastasi Dorian nytten
hullunkurisen katuvalta. "Lupasin tulla hnen kanssansa viime tiistaina
ersen klubiin Whitechapelissa, mutta minulta unohtui koko juttu.
Meidn oli mr soittaa duettoa yhdess -- kolme duettoa muistaakseni.
En tied, mit hn minulle sanonee. En uskalla kyd hnt
tervehtimsskn."

"Ah, kyll min vlitn rauhan teidn vlillnne. Hn on hyvin ihastunut
teihin. Enk todellakaan usko laiminlyntinne kovin vaaralliseksi.
Kuulijakunta luuli varmaan kuuntelevansa duettoa. Kun tti Agatha istuu
pianon reen, niin hn pit nt aivan kahden verosta."

"Se ei ole imartelevaa hnelle, eik juuri mikn kohteliaisuus
minullekaan", vastasi Dorian nauraen.

Lordi Henry katsahti hneen. Niin, hn oli todellakin hyvin kaunis,
miten kauniit nuo hienosti kaarevat, punertavat huulet, nuo vilpittmt,
siniset silmt ja kiharaiset, kullankarvaiset hiukset. Hnen kasvoissaan
oli jotakin, joka heti hertti luottamusta. Niiss oli nuoruuden
avomielisyytt sek nuoruuden intohimoista puhtautta. Saattoi selvsti
huomata, ettei maailma ollut hnt turmellut. Ei ihme, vaikka Basil
Hallward hnt jumaloikin.

"Te olette aivan liiaksi kaunis uhrautuaksenne hyvntekevisyydelle, mr.
Gray, aivan liiaksi kaunis." Ja lordi Henry heittytyi sohvalle ja avasi
sikarikotelonsa.

Maalari oli sekoittanut vrejns ja laittanut pensselit kuntoon. Hn
nytti alakuloiselta, ja kuullessaan lordi Henryn viimeisen
huomautuksen, hn vilkaisi hneen, ja hetken epiltyn, sanoi: "Harry,
min tahtoisin valmistaa tnn tmn kuvan. Olisinko mielestsi kovin
epkohtelias, jos pyytisin sinua lhtemn?"

Lordi Henry hymyili ja katseli Dorian Grayt. "Pitk minun lhte, mr.
Gray?" hn kysyi.

"Ah, lk lhtek, lordi Henry. Basil nytt tnn olevan pahalla
tuulella ja silloin min en voi siet hnt. Sit paitsi tahtoisin
tiet, miksi minun ei pitisi harjoittaa hyvntekevisyytt."

"En min huoli sanoa sit teille, mr. Gray. Se on niin ikv aine, ett
siit pitisi puhua vakavasti. Mutta en min lhde pois tlt, koska te
pyysitte minua jmn. Sinulle se kai on yhdentekev Basil? Sin olet
usein sanonut olevasi mielisssi, jos mallisi on tilaisuudessa
juttelemaan jonkun kanssa."

Hallward puri huuliaan. "Jos Dorian haluaa, niin tietysti sinun tytyy
jd. Dorianin oikut ovat lakeja kaikille muille paitsi hnelle
itsellens."

Lordi Henry tarttui hattuunsa ja hansikkoihinsa.

"Sinun kehoituksesi jmn on kovin kiihke, mutta minun tytynee
sittenkin lhte. Olen luvannut tavata erst henkil Orleansissa.
Hyvsti, mr. Gray. Tulkaa jonakin iltapuolena tervehtimn minua Curzon
streetin varrelle. Olen melkein aina kello viidelt kotona. Kirjoittakaa
minulle kun tulette. Olisin pahoillani, jos ette tapaisi minua."

"Basil", huudahti Dorian Gray, "jos lordi Henry Wotton lhtee, niin min
myskin. Sin et koskaan maalatessasi avaa huuliasi, ja on niin kauhean
ikv seisoa tss ja nytt iloiselta. Pyyd hnt jmn. Min
vaadin sit."

"J Harry, Dorianille mieliksi, niin olen sinulle kiitollinen", sanoi
Hallward katse kiintyneen tauluunsa. "Se on aivan totta, etten koskaan
tyt tehdessni puhu enk kuuntele myskn. Ja se on kai hirven
ikv onnettomille malleilleni. Min pyydn sinua jmn."

"Mutta mit min teen tuolle miehelle, joka odottaa minua Orleansissa?"

Maalari nauroi. "En min usko ett siit seuraa mitn ikvyyksi. Istu
sin alas, Harry. Ja nyt, Dorian, nouse tuolle korotukselle, lk liiku
liiaksi, l myskn pane vhintkn huomiota siihen mit lordi Henry
sanoo. Hn vaikuttaa paljon pahaa kaikkiin ystviins, minua yksin
lukuunottamatta."

Dorian Gray nousi korotukselle kasvoissaan nuoren kreikkalaisen
martyyrin ilme ja irvisti hiukan tyytymttmsti lordi Henrylle, joka
oli jo ehtinyt voittaa hnen suosionsa. Lordi Henry oli niin aivan
erilainen kuin Basil. He olivat toistensa tydelliset vastakohdat. Ja
kuinka sointuva ni hnell oli. Hetken kuluttua hn sanoi: "Onko
teidn vaikutuksenne todellakin niin paha, lordi Henry? Niin paha kuin
Basil vitt?"

"Ei ole mitn hyv vaikutusta olemassa, mr. Gray. Kaikki vaikutus on
epsiveellist -- epsiveellist tieteelliselt kannalta katsoen."

"Mink vuoksi?"

"Siksi ett jos koettaa vaikuttaa toiseen ihmiseen, niin samalla koettaa
antaa hnelle oman sielunsa. Silloin toinen ei ajattele en
luonnollisia ajatuksiaan, eik luonnollinen into lmmit hnt. Hnen
hyveens eivt ole en hnen omiansa. Hnen paheensa, jos sellaista
kuin pahetta on lainkaan olemassa, ovat lainattuja. Hnest tulee toisen
henkiln svelten kaiku, hn nyttelee osaa, joka ei ole hnelle aiottu.
Elmn tarkoituksena on itsens kehitys. Saada ilmi oma luontomme -- kas
siin kunkin ihmisen tehtv maailmassa. Nykyaikana ihmiset pelkvt
omaa itsens. He ovat unhoittaneet korkeimman kaikista
velvollisuuksista, sen velvollisuuden, joka on jokaisella ihmisell
itsens kohtaan. Tietysti he ovat armeliaita. Ravitsevat nlkisi ja
antavat kerjlisille vaatteita. Mutta heidn oma sielunsa menee
hukkaan. Rodun rohkeus on kadonnut. Ehkei meill ole sit koskaan
ollutkaan. Me pelkmme yhteiskuntaa, siin on koko siveellisyyden
perustus, ja me pelkmme Jumalaa, -- siin piilee taas uskonnon
salaisuus -- nuo molemmat voimat ne meit hallitsevat. Ja kuitenkin --"

"Knn psi hiukan enemmn oikealle, Dorian, ole hyv", sanoi maalari
vaipuneena kokonaan tyhns ja huomaten vain ilmeen pojan kasvoissa,
jota hn ei ollut koskaan ennen nhnyt.

"Ja kuitenkin", jatkoi lordi Henry matalalla, sointuvalla nelln,
liikuttaen sulavasti kttns, mik liike oli ollut hnelle ominainen
aina Etonin kouluajoilta saakka, "min luulen, ett jos yksikin ihminen
elisi oikein tydellist ja kokonaista elm, pstisi valloilleen
joka ainoan tunteensa, ilmaisisi jokaisen ajatuksensa, toteuttaisi
kaikki unelmansa -- niin luulen ett maailma unohtaisi kaikki
keskiaikuiset tautinsa ja voimakkaan ilon vallassa palaisi takaisin
helleniliseen ihanteesen. Ehkp johonkin viel hienompaankin ja
rikkaampaankin. Mutta rohkeinkin ihminen meidn parissamme pelk
itsen. Barbarien itsekidutus jatkuu yh edelleen meidn aikanamme
kieltymyksen, joka katkeroittaa meidn elmmme. Me saamme krsi
rangaistuksen omien laiminlyntiemme vuoksi. Jokainen vietti, jota me
yritmme hillit, it meidn sielussamme ja myrkytt meidt. Ruumis
tekee kerran synti, ja on silloin vapaa siit, sill teko on
jonkinlainen puhdistus. Jljelle ei j muuta kuin muisto nautinnosta,
tai turhat omantunnonvaivat. Ainoa tapa, mill voi vapautua
kiusauksesta, on antautua sille alttiiksi. Vastustakaa sit, niin teidn
sielunne halajaa sit, mit te silt olette kieltnyt, himoitsee sit,
mink teidn suvaitsemattomat lakinne ovat tehneet suvaitsemattomaksi ja
laittomaksi. Sanotaan ett suurimmat maailmantapaukset ovat tapahtuneet
aivoissa. Aivoissa, yksinomaan aivoissa, maailman suurimmat synnitkin
ovat tapahtuneet. Te, mr. Gray, te itse, joka olette niin sanomattoman
nuori ja viattoman lapsekas, teill on ollut intohimoja, jotka ovat
peloittaneet teit, ajatuksia, jotka ovat tyttneet teidn mielenne
kauhulla, unia sek pivll ett yll, joiden muistokin vain voipi
nostaa hpen punan poskillenne."

"Vaietkaa!" nkytti Dorian Gray, "vaietkaa! Te panette pni pyrlle.
Min en tied, mit teille vastaisin. Vastaus on olemassa, mutta min en
voi sit lyt. lk puhuko. Antakaa minun ajatella. Tai mielemmin,
antakaa minun koettaa olla ajattelematta."

Lhes kymmenen minuuttia hn seisoi liikkumatta, huulet avoinna,
silmiss kumma loisto. Hn tunsi himmesti, ett aivan uusi voima alkoi
vaikuttaa hness. Mutta samalla hnest tuntui kuin tuo voima olisi
kohonnut hnen omasta sielustansa. Nuo muutamat sanat, joita Basilin
ystv oli lausunut hnelle -- epilemtt aivan satunnaisia sanoja, jos
kohta tahallisia paradokseja -- olivat kosketelleet jotakin salaista
kielt, joka thn asti oli pysynyt aivan nettmn, mutta joka nyt
vrhteli tahdissa hnen valtasuonensa kanssa.

Samalla tavalla soitto saattoi vaikuttaa hneen. Soitto oli usein
saattanut hnet aivan suunniltaan. Mutta soitto ei koskaan puhjennut
sanoiksi. Se ei luonut uutta maailmaa, vaan pikemmin uuden kaaoksen.
Mutta sanat! Yksinomaan sanat! Miten julmia ne olivat! Kuinka elvi,
selvi ja kauheita! Niit oli mahdoton pst pakoon. Ja kuitenkin mik
viehttv tenho niiss piili! Ne nyttivt voivan antaa plastillisen
muodon muodottomille esineille, niiss oli omaa musiikkiansa, joka oli
yht suloista kuin viulun tai luutun ni. Vain sanat! Onko mitn niin
todellista kuin sanat?

Niin, poikavuosiltaan hn muisti tapauksia, joita hn ei ollut voinut
ymmrt. Nyt hn ne ymmrsi. Elm leimahti kki hehkuvana hnen
edessn. Hnest tuntui iknkuin hn olisi kulkenut keskell liekkej.
Miksei hn ollut ymmrtnyt sit ennemmin?

Lordi Henry tarkasteli hnt hieman hymyillen. Hienolla psykologisella
aistillaan hn tiesi milloin olla vaiti. Hn tunsi suurta mielenkiintoa.
Hnt hmmstytti se killinen vaikutus, joka oli seurannut hnen
sanojansa. Hnen mieleens johtui kirja, jonka hn kuudentoista vanhana
oli lukenut, kirja, joka hnelle oli paljastanut paljon uusia, ennen
aavistamattomia asioita, ja hn ihmetteli tokko Dorian Gray tll
hetkell koki jotakin samankaltaista. Hn oli vain ampunut nuolen
ilmaan. Oliko se osunut maaliin? Miten ihastuttava tuo poika oli!

Hallward maalasi tuolla ihmeellisell varmuudellaan, joka oli hnelle
niin ominaista, tuolla rohkeudella ja tosihienoudella, joka taiteessa
aina todistaa suurta voimaa. Hn ei huomannut killist hiljaisuutta.

"Basil, en jaksa seisoa en", sanoi Dorian Gray kki. "Min lhden
istumaan ulos puutarhaan. Tll on tukehduttavan kuuma."

"Rakas ystv, olen kovin pahoillani. Maalatessani en voi ajatella
mitn muuta. Mutta sin et ole koskaan ollut niin hyv kuin tnn.
Seisoit niin ihmeen hiljaa. Min olen saanut juuri sen ilmeen kuvaan,
jota halusin -- huulet puoleksi auenneina ja silmiin kirkkaan loisteen.
En tied mit Harry on sanonut sinulle, mutta hn on varmaan loihtinut
sinun kasvoihisi tuon ihmeellisen ilmeen. Luultavasti hn on imarrellut
sinua. l usko sanaakaan siit, mit hn sanoo."

"Ei hn ole imarrellut minua yhtn. Ehkp juuri senvuoksi en usko
sit, mit hn on sanonut."

"Te tiedtte varsin hyvin ett te uskotte", sanoi lordi Henry luoden
hneen haaveelliset, vshtneet silmns. "Min tulen teidn kanssanne
puutarhaan. Tll atelierissa on hirvittvn kuuma. Basil, anna meille
jotakin kylm juoda, jotakin mansikkamehua."

"Tietysti, Harry. Paina kelloa vain, ja kun Parker tulee, niin sano
hnelle, mit haluat. Min maalaan vain tmn taustan, sitten tulen
teidn luoksenne. l pidt Doriania kovin kauan. En koskaan ole ollut
paremmalla maalaustuulella kuin tnn. Tst tulee minun
mestariteokseni. Tmmisennkin se on minun mestariteokseni."

Lordi Henry meni puutarhaan ja lysi Dorian Grayn, joka oli ktkenyt
kasvonsa viileihin sireenikukkiin ja kuumentapaisesti imi niiden
tuoksua, iknkuin ne olisivat olleet viini. Lordi Henry astui hnen
luoksensa ja laski ktens hnen olkaplleen. "Se on oikein se", hn
sanoi puolineen. "Ei mikn muu kuin aistit voi parantaa sielua,
samoinkuin ei mikn muu kuin sielu voi parantaa aisteja."

Nuorukainen spshti ja vetytyi pois. Hn oli avopin ja lehdet olivat
prrittneet hnen kiharansa ja saattaneet vanukkeihin kaikki nuo
kultaiset sikeet. Hnen silmissn ilmeni pelkoa, iknkuin hnet olisi
kki unesta hertetty. Hnen hienosti veistetyt sieramensa vrhtelivt
ja ktkss oleva hermo vavahutteli hnen punoittavia huuliaan.

"Niin", jatkoi lordi Henry, "siin on yksi elmn suurimpia salaisuuksia
-- parantaa sielu aistin keinoilla ja aistit sielun avulla. Te olette
ihmeellinen olento. Te tiedtte enemmn kuin mit te luulette
tietvnne, samoin kuin te tiedtte vhemmn kuin mit te haluaisitte
tiet."

Dorian Gray rypisti kulmakarvojaan ja knsi pns pois. Hn ei voinut
olla pitmtt tuosta kookkaasta, miellyttvst nuoresta miehest, joka
seisoi hnen vieressns. Hnen romantiset, oliivinvriset kasvonsa ja
elhtnyt ilmeens huvittivat hnt. Hnen hillitty, pehme nens oli
tavallaan tenhova. Hnen viilet, valkeat, kukkamaiset ktens, nekin
olivat ihmeellisen viehttvt. Ne liikkuivat hnen puhuessansa kuin
musiikki ja nyttivt puhuvan omaa kieltns. Mutta hn pelksi hnt ja
hpesi omaa arkuuttaan. Miksik vieraan piti tulla herttmn hnt
tyteen tajuntaan? Hn oli tuntenut Basil Hallwardin jo kuukausimri,
mutta heidn vlinen ystvyytens ei ollut muuttanut hnt. kki oli
nyt vieras tullut hnen tielleen, joka nytti paljastavan hnelle elmn
salaperisyyden. Vaan mit pelon syyt hnell oikeastaan oli? Eihn hn
ollut mikn koulupoika eik nuori tytt. Tuo pelko oli kerrassaan
mieletnt.

"Mennn istumaan siimekseen", sanoi lordi Henry. "Parker on tuonut
meille juotavaa, ja jos te seisotte viel tuossa paahteessa, niin teidn
ihonne pilaantuu aivan, eik Basil en koskaan maalaa teit. lk
pivetyttk itsenne. Se ei sopisi teille."

"Mit se tekisi?" sanoi Dorian Gray nauraen, kyden penkille istumaan
puutarhan perll.

"Se merkitsisi teille paljonkin, mr. Gray."

"Mink vuoksi?"

"Siksi ett teidn nuoruutenne on hurmaava eik maailmassa mikn muu
ole arvokasta, paitsi nuoruus."

"Ei minun mielestni, lordi Henry."

"Niin, te ette sit viel tunne. Kerran, kun te olette vanha ja
ryppyinen ja ruma, kun ajatukset ovat uurtaneet vakoja teidn otsaanne
ja intohimojen tuli polttanut merkkins teidn huuliinne, te tunnette
sen kipesti. Nyt, minne ikn te tulette, te hurmaatte maailman.
Kestneek sit aina?... Teill on ihmeellisen kauniit kasvot, mr. Gray.
lk rypistk kulmianne. Se on aivan varma. Ja kauneus on yksi neron
ilmaisumuodoista -- se on korkeampikin kuin nero, koskei se kaipaa
mitn selityst. Se on tosiasia maailmassa, niinkuin auringonpaiste tai
kevt-aika tai kuun hopeanhohde, joka kuvastuu synkn veden pintaan.
Siit ei voi vitell. Sill on jumalallinen hallitsijaoikeutensa. Se
kohottaa prinsseiksi ne, jotka sen omistavat. Te hymyilette? Ah, te ette
hymyile en kadotettuanne sen... Ihmiset ovat joskus vittneet, ett
kauneus on pintapuolista. Voihan se olla. Mutta ei se ainakaan ole yht
pintapuolista kuin ajatus. Minun mielestni kauneus on ihmeitten ihme.
Vain typert ihmiset eivt arvostele asioita ulkomuodon mukaan. Maailman
todellinen salaperisyys piilee nkyvss, eik nkymttmss... Niin,
mr. Gray, jumalat ovat olleet teille armeliaat. Mutta jumalat voivat
nopeasti riist pois lahjansa. Teille ei ole suotu kuin muutamia
vuosia, joina te voitte el todellisesti, tydellisesti ja
kokonaisesti. Kun teidn nuoruutenne aika on kadonnut, niin teidn
kauneutennekin on kadonnut, ja silloin te huomaatte, etteivt mitkn
voitot teit en odota. Tai te saatte tyyty noihin vhisiin
voittoihin, jotka entisyyden muistojen thden tuntuvat katkerammilta
kuin tydellinen hvi. Jokainen kuukausi vie teidt lhemmksi julmaa
kohtaloa. Aika kadehtii teit ja koettaa hvitt teidn liljojanne ja
ruusujanne. Te kellastutte ja laihdutte ja silmienne loisto katoaa. Ja
te krsitte julmasti... Oi, nauttikaa nuoruudestanne, niin kauan kuin se
on teidn omanne. lk tuhlatko pivienne kultaa siihen mik on
ikvystyttv, lk yrittk turhaan korjata sit mik auttamattomasti
on mennytt. lk kuluttako elmnne tyhmyydess, jokapivisyydess
eik tietmttmyydess. Ne ovat vain meidn aikamme vri ihanteita ja
sairaaloisia pyrintj. Elk! Elk tuota ihmeellist elm, joka on
teidn omanne! lk olko kyttmtt mitn hyvksenne. Etsik aina
uusia nautintoja. lk peltk koskaan mitn... Uutta hedonismia --
sit juuri meidn vuosisatamme kaipaa. Ehk te olette aiottu sen
nkyvksi symboliksi. Teidn personallisuudellanne te voitte toteuttaa
vaikka mit. Maailma on teidn omanne yhden kokonaisen kevn...
Tavatessani teidt min huomasin, ettei teill ollut aavistustakaan
omasta todellisesta olemuksestanne, ettette tienneet miksi te voisitte
kelvata. Teiss oli niin paljon viehttv, ett minun tytyi paljastaa
teille hiukan omaa itsenne. Min ajattelin, mik vahinko, jos te
menisitte hukkaan. Sill teidn nuoruutenne aika on niin lyhyt -- niin
kovin lyhyt. Tavalliset metskukat kuihtuvat, mutta ne kukkivat jlleen.
Kultavihma on ensi kesn yht keltainen kuin nytkin. Kuukauden kuluttua
on metskynns tynn purppuraisia thti ja vuosi vuodelta nuo
punoittavat thdet tuikkivat sen vihrell lehtitaivaalla. Mutta me emme
saa koskaan nuoruuttamme takaisin. Ilonsuoni, joka tykkii meiss
kahdenkymmenen vuoden vanhoina, menett kiihkeytens. Meidn jsenemme
jykistyvt, aistimme veltostuvat. Me muutumme julmiksi nukeiksi, joiden
mieliss intohimojen muisto kummittelee, nuo intohimot, joita me liiaksi
pelksimme, nuo kiihket kiusaukset, joihin me emme uskaltaneet
antautua. Nuoruus! Nuoruus! Elmss ei ole mitn nuoruuden veroista!"

Dorian Gray kuunteli suurin silmin ihmetyksen vallassa. Sireenioksa
putosi hnen kdestn maahan. kinen mehilinen surisi hetken sen
ymprill. Sitten se alkoi kulkea pitkin pienien kukkien puikeata kupua.
Dorian tarkasteli sit hetken aikaa tuolla tavattomalla mielenkiinnolla,
jota me koetamme osoittaa aivan turhanpivisille esineille, kun jokin
trke asia peloittaa meit, kun jokin uusi, selittmtn tunne saa
meiss vallan, tai kun jokin kauhistuttava ajatus kki rynt meidn
aivoihimme ja vaatii meit antautumaan. Hetken kuluttua mehilinen lensi
pois. Dorian nki, ett se ktkeytyi kellokukan kupuun. Kukka nytti
vrhtelevn ja keijui sitten hiljalleen edes-takaisin.

kki maalari ilmestyi atelierin ovelle ja viittasi heit sisn. He
katsoivat toisiinsa hymyillen.

"Min odotan teit", hn huudahti. "Tulkaa sisn. Valo on aivan
erinomainen, ottakaa lasit mukaanne."

He nousivat ja astuivat yhdess tiet pitkin.

Kaksi vihren ja valkoisen kirjavaa perhosta lensi heidn ohitsensa, ja
prynpuussa puutarhan perll alkoi rastas laulaa.

"Te olette iloinen, mr. Gray, ett olette tavannut minut", sanoi lordi
Henry katsoen hneen.

"Kyll, nyt min olen iloinen. Mutta saapa nhd, iloitsenko siit
aina."

"Aina! Se on hirve sana. Minua vrisytt joka kerta kun kuulen tuon
sanan. Naiset niin mielelln sit kyttvt. He pilaavat jokaisen
romaanin kun he toivovat sen ikuisesti kestvn. Sill sanalla sit
paitsi ei ole minknlaista tarkoitusta. Ainoa ero oikun ja koko elmn
kestvn intohimon vlill on se, ett oikku kest hiukan kauemmin."

Kun he astuivat sisn atelieriin, niin Dorian Gray laski ktens lordi
Henryn ksivarrelle. "Siin tapauksessa olkoon meidn ystvyytemme vain
oikku", hn mutisi punastuen omaa rohkeuttansa ja nousi sitten
korotukselle asettuakseen asentoonsa. Lordi Henry heittytyi suureen
korituoliin ja katseli hnt. Ei kuulunut muuta nt kuin penselin
rapinaa kankaalla, silloin-tllin vain Hallward astui askeleen taakse
ja katseli tytn etmmlt. Tomuhiukkaset hyppelivt kullanhohtavissa
auringonsteiss, jotka viistosti laskeutuivat sisn avonaisesta
ovesta. Ruusujen tukehduttava tuoksu tytti ilman.

Neljnnestunnin kuluttua Hallward lopetti tyns, katseli kauan aikaa
Dorian Grayt ja taas pitkn aikaa taulua, purren suuren pensselin
vartta ja rypisten kulmakarvojaan. "Se on aivan valmis", huudahti hn
vihdoin ja piirsi punaisilla kirjaimilla nimens taulun
vasemmanpuoliseen nurkkaan.

Lordi Henry astui hnen luokseen ja tarkasteli taulua. Se oli todellakin
ihmeellinen taideteos ja erinomaisen muotoinen.

"Rakas ystv, min onnittelen sinua sydmellisesti", sanoi hn. "Se on
nykyajan hienoimpia tauluja. Mr. Gray, tulkaa tekin sit katsomaan."

Nuorukainen stkhti, iknkuin hn olisi unesta hernnyt. "Onko se
todellakin valmis?" hn mutisi laskeutuen alas korotukselta.

"Aivan valmis", sanoi maalari. "Ja tnn sin seisoit aivan
erinomaisesti. Min olen hyvin kiitollinen sinulle."

"Se on kokonaan minun ansioni", katkaisi lordi Henry puheen. "Eik
totta, mr. Gray?"

Dorian ei vastannut, vaan astui huolettomasti muotokuvan eteen ja
kntyi sit kohti. Nhdessn sen hn vetytyi taaksepin, ja hnen
poskiinsa kohosi hetkeksi ilon puna. Riemu steili mys hnen
silmistns, iknkuin hn olisi nhnyt itsens ensi kertaa. Hn seisoi
liikkumatta ja ihmeissn, hmrsti aavistaen, ett Hallward puhui
hnelle, mutta ymmrtmtt mit hn sanoi. Hnen oman kauneutensa tunne
valtasi hnet kki kuin ilmestys. Hn ei ollut koskaan ennen sit
ksittnyt. Basil Hallwardin imartelut olivat tuntuneet hnest vain
ystvn liioittelulta. Hn oli kuunnellut niit nauraen ja unohtanut ne
jlleen. Ne eivt olleet jttneet mitn vaikutusta hnen luonteesensa.
Silloin lordi Henry Wotton tuli veisaten ihmeellisen ylistyslaulun
nuoruudesta ja lausuen julman varoituksen sen katoavaisuudesta. Se
hertti hnet oikeaan aikaan, ja nyt kun hn katseli oman ihanuutensa
varjokuvaa, selvisi hnelle kki tuon kuvauksen todellisuus. Niin,
piv koittaisi kerran, jolloin hnen kasvonsa olisivat ryppyiset ja
kuihtuneet, hnen silmns himmet ja vrittmt, hnen vartalonsa
kumara ja kmpel. Puna kalpenisi hnen huuliltaan ja kulta katoaisi
hnen hiuksistansa. Sielu murtaisi hnen ruumiinsa. Hn muuttuisi
julmaksi, vastenmieliseksi ja rumaksi.

Ajatellessaan sit hn tunsi kovaa kipua, iknkuin hnt olisi
veitsell isketty, ja hnen herkt hermonsa vrisivt. Hnen silmns
synkkenivt tummiksi kuin ametistit ja peittyivt kyynelharsoon. Hnest
tuntui iknkuin jkylm ksi olisi laskeutunut hnen sydmelleen.

"Eik se miellyt sinua?" kysyi vihdoin Hallward, jota nuorukaisen
nettmyys hiukan loukkasi, voimatta ymmrt mit se tarkoitti.

"Tietysti se hnt miellytt", sanoi lordi Henry. "Kukapa ei siit
pitisi? Se on suurinta mit nykyajan taide on luonut. Min maksan
sinulle siit mit ikn haluat. Minun tytyy se saada."

"Se ei ole minun omani, Harry."

"Kenenk sitten?"

"Dorianin tietysti", vastasi maalari.

"Onpa hnell hyv onni."

"Kuinka surullista!" mutisi Dorian Gray, silmt yh kiintynein
muotokuvaan. "Miten haikeata! Min vanhenen, tulen julmaksi, rumaksi.
Mutta tm kuva pysyy alati nuorena. Se ei koskaan tule tt kespiv
vanhemmaksi... Jospa olisi pinvastoin! Jospa min voisin pysy aina
nuorena ja kuva vanhentuisi! Siit hyvst min antaisin vaikka mit!
Niin, ei mikn olisi minusta liian korkea hinta! Antaisin siit vaikka
sieluni!"

"Sellainen vaihtokauppa ei suinkaan olisi sinulle mieleen, Basil", sanoi
lordi Henry nauraen. "Se uurtaisi liian syvt vaot sinun tyhsi."

"Min nousisin kiihken vastarintaan, Harry", sanoi Hallward.

Dorian Gray kntyi hneen. "Sen kyll uskon, Basil. Sin rakastat
taidettasi enemmn kuin ystvisi. Min en merkitse sinulle enemp kuin
vihre bronssikuva. Tuskin niinkn paljon."

Maalari stkhti hmmstyneen. Nuo sanat eivt kuulostaneet Dorianin
puheelta. Mit oli tapahtunut? Hnhn nytti aivan suuttuneelta. Hnen
kasvonsa punoittivat ja hnen poskensa paloivat.

"Niin", jatkoi Dorian, "min merkitsen sinulle vhemmn kuin sinun
norsunluinen Hermeksesi tai hopeafaunisi. Ne pysyvt sinulle aina
rakkaina. Kuinka kauan sin vlitt minusta? Kunnes saan ensimisen
ryppyni, eik niin. Min tiedn nyt, ett kun ihmisen kauneus katoaa,
niin on samalla kaikki kadonnut. Sinun taulusi on sen minulle opettanut.
Lordi Henry Wotton on aivan oikeassa. Kauneus yksin maailmassa on jonkun
arvoista. Kun huomaan vanhenevani, niin min otan itseni hengilt."

Hallward kntyi kalpeana hnen puoleensa ja tarttui hnt kteen
kiinni. "Dorian! Dorian!" hn huudahti, "l puhu tuolla tapaa. Minulla
ei koskaan ennen ole ollut sinun kaltaistasi ystv, enk koskaan saa
toista samankaltaista. Ethn sin kadehti aineellisia esineit, eik
totta? -- sin, joka olet niit kaikkia kauniimpi!"

"Min kadehdin kaikkia niit, joiden kauneus ei katoa. Min kadehdin
tuota kuvaa, jonka minusta olet maalannut. Miksi se saa pit sen, mik
minun on pakko kadottaa? Joka ainoa haihtuva hetki ryst minulta
jotakin ja antaa sille. Oi, -- jospa olisi vain pinvastoin! Jospa kuva
voisi muuttua ja min voisin pysy alati tllaisena! Miksi sin sen
maalasit? Viel kerran se minua pilkkaa -- armottomasti pilkkaa!" Kuumat
kyyneleet kohosivat hnen silmiins. Hn vetisi ktens irti ja
heittytyi sohvalle peitten kasvonsa tyynyihin, iknkuin rukoillen.

"Tmn sin olet tehnyt, Harry", sanoi maalari katkerasti.

Lordi Henry kohautti olkapitn. "Se on Dorian Grayn todellinen luonto
-- siin kaikki."

"Sit se ei ole."

"Jollei ole, niin mit minulla on sen kanssa tekemist?"

"Sinun olisi pitnyt menn silloin kun min pyysin", mutisi Basil.

"Min jin sinun pyynnstsi", vastasi lordi Henry.

"Harry, min en voi riidell yht aikaa molempien parhaiden ystvieni
kanssa, mutta te saatatte minut vihaamaan parasta teosta, mink koskaan
olen saanut aikaan, ja siksi min sen tuhoan. Mitp muuta se olisi kuin
kangaspalanen ja vri? Min en tahdo, ett se pilaa meidn kaikkien
elmn."

Dorian Gray kohotti kultaiset kutrinsa tyynyist ja katsoi Basiliin
kalpein kasvoin ja kyyneltynein silmin, kun tm astui ikkunan vieress
olevan maalipydn reen. Mit hn aikoi tehd? Hnen sormensa etsivt
kiihkesti jotakin tinatuubien ja kuivettuneiden pensselien joukosta.
Niin, hn etsi pitk palettiveist, jonka ter oli ohutta, joustavaa
terst. Vihdoin hn sen lysi. Hn aikoi sill puhkaista kankaan rikki.

Khesti huudahtaen nuorukainen hyppsi yls sohvalta ja hykten
Hallwardin luo hn riisti veitsen hnen kdestn ja heitti sen
atelierin toiseen phn. "Sin et saa, Basil!" hn huusi. "Se olisi
murha!"

"Olen iloinen ett vihdoinkin annat tylleni arvoa, Dorian", sanoi
maalari kylmsti toinnuttuaan hmmstyksestn. "Min en luullut sinun
sit tekevn."

"Enk panisi sille arvoa? Minhn rakastan sit, Basil. Se on osa
minusta itsestni. Sen min tunnen."

"No hyv, heti kun olet kuiva, min vernissaan sinut, panen sinut
kehyksiin ja lhetn sinut kotiin. Sitten voit tehd itsellsi mit
ikn haluat." Ja hn astui lattian yli ja soitti teet. "Sin haluat
kai teet, Dorian? Ja kai sinkin, Harry? Vai halveksitteko te niin
yksinkertaista nautintoa?"

"Min ihailen yksinkertaisia nautintoja", sanoi lordi Henry. "Niihin
monimutkaisen ihmisen tytyy lopulta turvautua..Mutta min en pid
kohtauksista muualla kuin nyttmll. Mit ihmeellisi olentoja te
molemmat olette! En muista kuka lie mritellyt ihmist jrkevksi
elimeksi. Se ainakin oli liian nopea mritelm. Ihminen on kaikkea
muuta kuin jrkev, ja siit min olenkin hyvillni. Mutta min
toivoisin ettette te riitelisi kuvasta. Paljoa parempi jos olisit
antanut sen minulle, Basil. Tuo tyhm poika ei sit lainkaan tarvitse.
Mutta minulle se olisi hyvin tarpeen."

"Jos annat sen kelle muulle hyvns, Basil, kuin minulle, niin en suo
sit sinulle koskaan anteeksi!" sanoi Dorian Gray. "Enk min salli,
ett ihmiset sanovat minua tyhmksi pojaksi."

"Tiedthn ett kuva on sinun, Dorian. Min lahjoitin sen sinulle jo
ennenkuin sit oli olemassakaan."

"Ja te tiedtte aivan hyvin olleenne hiukan tyhm, mr. Gray, ettek voi
vitt mitn vastaan, kun teille muistutetaan ett olette viel varsin
nuori."

"Tn aamuna olisin voinut vitt sit vastaan hyvinkin kiihkesti,
lordi Henry."

"Niin, tn aamuna! Te aloitte vasta silloin el."

Ovella kuului kolkutus ja palvelija tuli sisn kantaen tytelist
teetarjotinta ja laskien sen pienelle japanilaiselle pydlle. Kuului
kuppien ja lautasten kilin ja teekeittin kohinaa. Nuori poika toi
sisn kaksi pyre kiinalaista maljaa. Dorian Gray astui pydn luo ja
kaatoi teet kuppeihin. Molemmat herrat astuivat hitaasti lhemmksi ja
tarkastelivat maljojen sisllyst.

"Mennn tn iltana teatteriin", sanoi lordi Henry. "Varmaan jossakin
teatterissa on jotakin hyv. Olen tosin luvannut syd pivllist
Whitell, mutta vain yhden vanhan ystvn kanssa. Voinhan lhett
hnelle shksanoman ja sanoa ett olen sairas, tai ett myhempi
sopimus est minua tulemasta. Olisihan se sopiva puolustus, sill siin
olisi suoruuden suloutta."

"On niin vaivalloista pukeutua frakkiin", mutisi Hallward. "Ja kun on
saanut sen niskaansa, niin se nytt niin rumalta."

"Aivan niin", vastasi lordi Henry miettivisesti, "yhdeksnnentoista
vuosisadan seurapuku on inhottava. Se on niin synkk, niin painostava.
Synti yksin on vririkasta meidn nykyaikaisessa elmssmme."

"Sinun ei pid puhua tuollaista Dorianin kuullen, Harry."

"Mink Dorianin? Senk joka kaataa meille teet, vai senk, joka kuvasta
katsoo meihin?"

"Ei kummankaan."

"Min lhtisin mielellni teidn kanssanne teatteriin, lordi Henry",
sanoi nuorukainen.

"Sitten te lhdette; ja sinkin tulet, Basil, eik totta?"

"En todellakaan voi. Minulla on niin paljon tyt."

"No niin, me menemme sitten kahden, mr. Gray."

"Suurimmalla mielihyvll."

Maalari puri huultaan ja astui kuppi kdess taulun luo. "Min jn
kotiin oikean Dorianin kanssa", hn sanoi surullisesti.

"Tuoko on oikea Dorian?" huudahti muotokuvan originaali hykten hnen
luokseen. "Olenko todellakin tuon nkinen?"

"Olet; sin olet aivan tuon nkinen."

"Kuinka ihmeellist, Basil!"

"Ainakin sin ulkomuodoltasi olet tuon nkinen. Mutta kuva ei koskaan
muutu", huokasi Hallward. "Se on sentn jotakin."

"Mit melua ihmiset pitvt uskollisuudesta!" huudahti lordi Henry.
"Yksin rakkaudessakin se on vain psykologinen kysymys. Se ei ole missn
tekemisess meidn tahtomme kanssa. Nuoret ihmiset tahtovat olla
uskollisia, mutta eivt kykene. Vanhat ihmiset tahtovat olla uskottomia,
eivtk voi kuitenkaan. Muuta ei juuri voi sanoa."

"l mene teatteriin tn iltana, Dorian", sanoi Hallward. "J minun
luokseni pivllisille."

"Min en voi, Basil."

"Mink vuoksi?"

"Senthden ett lupasin menn lordi Henry Wottonin kanssa."

"Ei hn pane sinuun sen enemp arvoa vaikka pidtkin lupauksesi. Itse
hn aina rikkoo omansa. Min pyydn ettet menisi."

Dorian Gray nauroi pudistaen ptn. "Min rukoilen sinua."

Nuorukainen epili ja silmsi lordi Henryyn, joka tarkasteli heit
pilkallisesti hymyillen teepydn luota.

"Minun tytyy, Basil", hn vastasi.

"No niin", sanoi Hallward ja astui pydn luo laskien kuppinsa
tarjottimelle. "On jo myhist, ja koska teidn tytyy viel pukeutua,
niin ei teill ole en aikaa hukata. Hyvsti, Harry. Hyvsti, Dorian.
Tule pian kymn. Tule huomenna."

"Tietysti."

"Ethn vain unohda?"

"Tietysti en", sanoi Dorian.

"Kuules ... Harry!"

"Niin, Basil!"

"Pid mielesssi mit min sanoin sinulle tn aamuna puutarhassa."

"Min en muista sit en."

"Min luotan sinuun."

"Min toivoisin, ett voisin itse luottaa itseeni", sanoi lordi Henry
nauraen. "Tulkaa, mr. Gray, minun vaununi odottavat ulkopuolella ja min
voin saattaa teidt ensin kotiin. Hyvsti, Basil. Tm iltapuoli on
ollut hyvin hauska."

Kun ovi sulkeutui heidn jlkeens, niin maalari heittytyi sohvalle ja
hnen kasvoillensa kohosi krsiv ilme.




LUKU III.


Seuraavana pivn kello puoli yksi lordi Henry Wotton kulki Curzon
streetilt Albanylle tervehtimn setns lordi Fermoria, joka oli
sukkelasuinen, joskin hiukan karheatapainen vanha poika. Suuri yleis
arveli hnt itsekkksi, koskei sill ollut mitn varsinaista hyty
hnest, mutta oman seurapiirins mielest hn oli hyvinkin aulis, sill
hn oli vieraanvarainen kaikille niille, jotka hnt huvittivat. Hnen
isns oli ollut Englannin lhettiln Madridissa Isabellan nuoruuden
aikana, jolloin ei kukaan viel uneksinutkaan Primist, mutta hn oli
vetytynyt pois diplomaatiselta uralta sen vuoksi, ettei hnt kutsuttu
lhettilksi Parisiin. Omasta mielestn hn olisi kuitenkin ollut
tysin ptev tuohon paikkaan syntyns, kylmverisyytens, virheettmien
englanninkielisten shksanomiensa ja kiihken nautintohalunsa vuoksi.
Poika, joka oli ollut isns sihteeri, oli seurannut pllikkns
esimerkki, jota siihen aikaan pidettiin tyhmyyten. Ja kun hn muutamia
kuukausia myhemmin peri isns arvonimen, niin hn antautui innokkaasti
tutkimaan ylimyssdyn suurta tyttmyyden taitoa. Hn omisti kaksi
suurta kaupungintaloa, mutta asui sittenkin mielemmin vuokrahuoneissa,
sill niist oli vhemmn vaivaa, ja aterioitsi klubissaan. Hn seurasi
jonkunmoisella innolla hiilikaivostensa hoitoa Midlandissa ja puolusti
tt teollisuussivuharrastustaan sill vitteell, ett se herrasmies,
jolla oli onni omistaa hiilikaivoksia, saattoi lmmitt omaa liettn
puilla. Valtiollisesti hn kuului torypuolueesen, paitsi silloin kuin
puolue oli hallituksessa, sill silloin hn stti sen jseni
radikaaliseksi roskajoukoksi. Hn oli sankari kamaripalvelijallensa,
joka aina stti hnt, mutta sit vastoin hn oli kauhistus
sukulaisillensa, joita hn taas vuorossaan stti. Hnen kaltaisensa
henkil ei olisi voinut synty missn muualla kuin Englannissa, ja hn
vitti aina ett kaikki siell kvi aivan nurin kurin. Hnen
periaatteensa olivat vanhanaikuisia, mutta ei ollut paljon sanottavaa
hnen ennakkoluulojansa vastaan.

Kun lordi Henry astui huoneesen, niin hn nki setns karhea
metsstysfakki ylln polttavan sikaria ja muristen lukevan Timesi.

"No, Harry", sanoi vanha herra, "mik saattaa sinut nin varhain
liikkeelle? Min luulin, ett te keikailijat ette nousisi koskaan ennen
kahta, ettek nyttytyisi muille ennen viitt."

"Vain sukurakkautta, voin vakuuttaa, set George. Min haluaisin
jotakin."

"Tietysti rahaa", sanoi lordi Fermor irvistellen. "No niin, ky istumaan
ja tee minulle asiasta selkoa. Nuoret luulevat nykyn ett raha on
pasia maailmassa."

"Aivan niin", mutisi lordi Henry, npistellen takkinsa napinlpe, "ja
kun he tulevat vanhoiksi, niin he sen tietvt. Mutta min en tarvitse
rahaa. Vaan ne, jotka maksavat laskunsa, tarvitsevat rahaa, set George,
enk min koskaan maksa niit. Luotto on nuoremman pojan poma, ja
sill on hyv el. Sit paitsi min teen aina kauppaa Dartmoorin
kauppiaiden luona, eivtk ne koskaan kiusaa minua laskuilla. Min
tarvitsen vain tietoja: en hydyllisi tietoja tietenkn, vaan aivan
turhanpivisi."

"No niin, min voin antaa sinulle tietoja kaikesta siit mit
englantilaisessa aateliskalenterissa seisoo, vaikka nykyn siin on
paljon hullutusta. Kun min olin diplomaattiuralla, niin silloin kaikki
oli paljoa paremmalla kannalla. Mutta minulle on kerrottu, ett nykyn
ihmiset voivat pst aateliskalenteriin tutkinnonkin nojalla. Mitp
siis voisit siit odottaa? Tutkinnot ovat humbugia alusta loppuun. Jos
mies on gentleman, niin hnell on aivan kylliksi tietoja, ja jos hn ei
ole gentleman, niin kaikki tieto on hnelle turmioksi."

"Onko mr. Dorian Grayn nimi aateliskalenterissa, set George", sanoi
lordi Henry hitaasti.

"Mr. Dorian Gray? Kuka hn on?" kysyi lordi Fermor rypisten tuuheita
valkoisia kulmakarvojaan.

"Sit min juuri tahtoisin tiet, set George. Tai oikeastaan, min
tiedn kuka hn on. Hn on viimeisen lordi Kelson tyttren poika. Hnen
itins nimi oli Devereux -- lady Margaret Devereux. Min tahtoisin
kuulla hnen idistns. Minklainen hn oli? Kenen kanssa hn oli
naimisissa? Sinhn tunsit melkein kaikki aikalaisesi, varmaan sin
tunsit hnetkin. Min olen nykyn hyvin huvitettu mr. Grayst. Olen
vastikn tutustunut hneen."

"Kelson tyttrenpoika!" toisti vanha herra -- "Kelson tyttrenpoika!...
Tietysti... Min tunsin hyvin hnen itins. Luullakseni olin lsn
hnen ristiisissns. Hn oli tavattoman kaunis tytt, tuo Margaret
Devereux, ja hn suututti kaikki nuoret miehet karkaamalla ern nuoren
kyhn miehen kanssa, joka ei ollut kerrassaan mikn, vain alaupseeri
jossakin jalkavenrykmentiss, tai jotain muuta sen tapaista. Tietysti.
Min muistan koko tuon tapauksen, iknkuin se olisi eilen sattunut.
Poika parka sai surmansa kaksintaistelussa Spa'ssa pari kuukautta
hittens jlkeen. Se oli hyvin ruma juttu. Kerrottiin ett Kelso oli
lahjonut ern belgialainen lurjuksen, jotta tm solvaisisi hnen
vvypoikaansa julkisesti -- lahjonut hnet, kuuletkos, lahjonut hnet --
ja ett tuo mies pisti hnet kuoliaaksi aivan kuin kyyhkysen. Juttu
saatiin vaikenemaan, mutta saipa mys Kelso hyvn aikaa sen jlkeen
yksinn aterioida klubissansa. Hn kuului ottaneen tyttrens jlleen
kotiin, mutta tm ei puhunut koskaan sanaakaan islle. Niin, olipa se
surullinen juttu. Vuoden kuluttua tytrkin kuoli. Hnelt ji siis
poika? Sen olin kokonaan unohtanut. Millainen poika hn on? Jos hn on
itiins, niin hn on varmaan kaunis."

"Hn on hyvin kaunis", vakuutti lordi Henry.

"Toivottavasti hn joutuu hyviin ksiin", jatkoi vanhus. "Hnen pitisi
saada koko joukon rahaa, jos Kelso on noudattanut oikeutta. Hnen
idillnkin oli omaisuutta, sill iti peri koko Selbyn tilan itins
isn jlkeen. Hnen itins is vihasi Kelsoa ja sanoi ett hn oli
halveksittava ihminen. Ja se hn olikin. Hn tuli Madridiin kerran kun
min olin siell. Totisesti, min hpesin hnen puolestansa.
Kuningatarkin tiedusti minulta sit englantilaista aatelismiest, joka
aina kiisteli ajurien kanssa maksusta. He keksivt siit kokonaisen
jutun. Min sen johdosta en uskaltanut nytt naamaanikaan hovissa
kokonaiseen kuukauteen. Toivottavasti hn kohteli tyttrens poikaa
paremmin kuin ajureita."

"En tied", vastasi lordi Henry. "Minun luullakseni poika on hyviss
varoissa. Hn ei ole viel tysi-ikinen. Hn omistaa Selbyn, sen
tiedn. Sen hn on kertonut minulle. Ja ... hnen itins, oliko hn
hyvin kaunis?"

"Margaret Devereux oli suloisimpia olentoja mit koskaan olen nhnyt.
Mik ihme sai hnet tuohon tekoon, sit en koskaan ole voinut ymmrt.
Olisihan hn voinut menn naimisiin kenen kanssa hyvns. Carlington oli
aivan hulluna hnen thtens. Ja hn oli mys luonteeltaan romantinen,
niinkuin kaikki sen perheen naiset. Miehet olivat kehnoja, mutta naiset
kerrassaan ihmeellisi. Carlington mateli polvillaan hnen edessns.
Sen hn itse sanoi minulle. Mutta hn teki vain pilkkaa Carlingtonista.
Ja siihen aikaan ei Lontoossa ollut ainoatakaan tytt, joka ei olisi
hnen jljessn juossut. Mutta naimakaupoista puhuessa, Harry, mit
pttmyyksi sinun issi kertoi minulle Dartmoorista, ett hn muka
aikoo naida jonkun amerikkalaisen? Eivtk englantilaiset tytt hnelle
kelpaa?"

"Nykyn avioliitot amerikkalaisten kanssa ovat hyvin muodissa, set
George."

"Mutta min asetan englantilaiset naiset koko maailman naisten edelle,
Harry", sanoi lordi Fermor, iskien nyrkill pytn.

"Amerikkalaiset ovat parhaassa kurssissa."

"Mutta ne eivt ole kestvi, olen kuullut sanottavan", mutisi hnen
setns.

"Pitk juoksu uuvuttaa heidt, mutta estejuoksussa he ovat kerrassaan
mainioita. Kaikki ky heilt lennossa. En usko ett Dartmoorilla on
hyv onnea."

"Minklainen on tytn perhe?" mutisi vanha herra. "Onko hnell
minknlaista perhett?"

Lordi Henry pudisti ptn. "Amerikkalaiset tytt salaavat yht
taitavasti vanhempansa kun englantilaiset entisyytens", sanoi hn
nousten mennkseen.

"He ovat kai sikakauppiaita?"

"Toivottavasti, set George, Dartmoorin thden. Olen kuullut sanottavan
ett sikakauppa politiikan jlkeen on kaikkein tuottavin liike."

"Onko hn kaunis?"

"Hn kyttytyy iknkuin hn olisi kaunis. Sen tekevt useimmat
amerikkalaiset. Siin on heidn viehtyksens salaisuus."

"Miksi nuo amerikkalaiset naiset eivt voi pysy omassa maassaan? He
vakuuttavat aina ett Amerikka on naisten paradiisi."

"Niin se onkin. Sen vuoksi he niin halukkaasti pyrkivtkin sielt pois,
aivan kuin Eevakin", sanoi lordi Henry. "Hyvsti, set George. Min
tulen myhn aamiaisille, jos viel viivyn. Kiitos siit tiedonannosta,
jonka olen saanut. Min haluan aina saada tarkat tiedot uusista
ystvistni, mutta vanhoista en tahdo tiet mitn."

"Miss sin syt aamiaista, Harry?"

"Tti Agathan luona. Olen tarjoutunut sinne aamiaisille yhdess mr.
Grayn kanssa. Hn on tdin viimeinen suojatti".

"Hm! Sano tti Agathalle, Harry, ettei hn vaivaisi minua en
hyvntekevisyysjutuillaan. Min olen kyllstynyt niihin. Tuo kelpo
nainen luulee, ettei minulla ole muuta tekemist kuin kirjoittaa
shekkej hnen typeri tuumiansa varten."

"Hyv, set George. Kyll min sanon, mutta ei siit ole apua.
Hyvntekijt kadottavat kaiken ihmisyystunteen. Se on heidn
luonteelleen ominaista."

Vanha herra nykksi myntvsti ptn ja soitti palvelijaa.

Lordi Henry kulki Burlington Streetin matalan pylvhikn lpi ja knsi
askeleensa Berkeley squari kohti.

Sellainen oli siis Dorian Grayn perhetarina. Semmoisenakin kuin hn oli
sen kuullut, vailla minknlaisia kaunisteluja, se oli liikuttanut
hnt, muistuttaen ihmeellist, melkein uudenaikaista romaania. Kaunis
nainen panee alttiksi kaikki hullun intohimon vuoksi. Muutamia hurjan
surullisia viikkoja, jotka keskeytyvt kki hirven, salakavalan
rikoksen vuoksi. Kuukausmri netnt eptoivoa, sitten lapsi, joka
syntyy tuskalla. Kuolema korjaa idin, poika j yksin vanhan ja kovan
miehen valtaan. Niin; se oli mieltkiinnittv tausta, josta pojan kuva
kohosi vielkin tydellisempn kuin mit se todellisuudessa oli.
Kaikissa harvinaisissa olosuhteista oli jotakin traagillista. Maailman
tytyi krsi synnytystuskia, jotta pieninkin kukka voisi puhjeta...
Miten ihastuttava Dorian olikaan ollut edellisen pivn pivllisill,
kun hn istui klubissa hnt vastapt silmiss hmmstynyt kiilto, suu
hiukan auki pelonsekaisen ilon vallassa ja herv ihmetyksen ilme
kasvoilla, joiden lmpist vri vahakynttiliden punertava valo
lissi. Puhuminen hnen kanssaan oli kuin soittamista mainiolla
viululla. Joka ainoa jousen kosketus ja vrys sai hnetkin
vrjmn... Mik tavaton nautinto tuossa tunteessa, kun saattoi
vaikuttaa toiseen ihmiseen. Ei mikn muu tunne ollut sen kaltaista.
Mik retn ilo siin, kun sai siirt oman sielunsa ihanaan kuoreen ja
antaa sen viivht siell jonkun aikaa; kun sai kuulla oman henkisen
katsantokantansa kaikuvan nuoruuden ja intohimon sveliss ja vuodattaa
toiseen oman luonnonlaatunsa iknkuin se olisi salaperist nestett
tai harvinaista tuoksua. Se oli ehk suurinta iloa, mit saattoi tuntea
meidn ahtaana ja alhaisena aikanamme, jonka huvit olivat niin
aistillisen ruumiillisia ja tarkoitukseltaan halpoja... Hn oli
tyypiltnkin merkillinen, tuo poika, jonka hn aivan sattumalta oli
tavannut Basilin atelieriss, tai ainakin hn voisi siksi tulla. Hness
oli suloutta ja nuorukaisen puhtautta, sek sellaista kauneutta, jota
nemme vanhojen kreikkalaisten marmorikuvissa. Hn kelpaisi sek
titaniksi ett narriksi. Kuinka sli, ett tuollaisen kauneuden oli
mr kuihtua... Ent Basil! Miten huvittava hn oli psykologiselta
kannalta katsoen! Uusi taidesuunta, uusi tapa nhd elm, jonka toinen
oli vain lsnolonsa kautta, aivan tietmttn herttnyt hness;
synkn metsn hiljainen henki, joka nkymttmn kulkee aavojen
kenttien yli, oli kki nyttytynyt hnelle dryadin kaltaisena,
pelottomana, sen vuoksi ett hnen omassa sielussaan, joka tuota henke
etsi, oli hernnyt ihmeellinen nkemys, jolle yksinn ihmeelliset asiat
nyttytyvt; itse muodot ja rajaviivat iknkuin hienonivat, ja
saavuttivat jonkunmoisen symbolisen arvon, iknkuin ne itse olisivat
jonkun muun ja tydellisemmn kauneuden kuvastusta, jonka varjoon ne
loivat todellisuutta. Miten ihmeellist se olikaan! Jotakin
samankaltaista juolahti hnen mieleens historiasta. Eik Plato, tuo
ajatusten taiteilija, ollut kaikkein ensiksi sit selvittnyt? Eik
Buonarotti ollut veistnyt sit sonettisikermn kirjavaan marmoriin?
Mutta meidn aikakaudellemme se oli vierasta... Niin, hn tahtoi koettaa
olla Dorian Graylle sit mit tm itsetiedottomasti oli taiteilijalle,
joka oli luonut tuon ihmeellisen muotokuvan. Hn koettaisi hallita
hnt, -- sit hn tosiaankin oli jo puolittain tehnytkin. Hn tahtoi
voittaa tuon merkillisen sielun omakseen.

Tuossa rakkauden ja kuoleman lapsessa oli tosiaankin jotakin tenhoavaa.

Hn pyshtyi kki ja silmsi yls taloihin. Hn huomasi sivuttaneensa
ttins oven ja hymyillen itsekseen hn kntyi takaisin. Kun hn astui
hiukan hmrn eteiseen, niin palvelija sanoi aamullisen olevan jo
alulla. Hn antoi hattunsa ja keppins hnelle ja meni ruokasaliin.

"Myhn niinkuin ainakin, Harry", huudahti hnen ttins pudistaen
ptns.

Hn sanoi jotakin puolustukseksensa ja istuttuaan tyhjlle sijalle tdin
viereen, hn katsoi ymprilleen nhdkseen keit oli lsn. Dorian
nykksi hnelle arasti ptn pydn pst, samalla kuin ilonpuna
kohosi hnen poskilleen. Vastapt hnt istui Harleyn herttuatar,
erittin hyvluontoinen ja lempe nainen, jota kaikki rakastivat. Hn
oli niin muodottoman suuri ruumiltaan, ett kaikki hnen aikuisensa
historiankirjoittajat olisivat sanoneet sit lihavuudeksi kaikissa
muissa naisissa, jotka eivt olleet herttuattaria. Hnen vieressn
oikealla puolella, istui sir Thomas Burdon, radikaali parlamentin jsen,
joka julkisessa elmss seurasi puolueen johtajaa, mutta
yksityiselmssn parasta kokkia, toteuttaen sen viisaan ja tunnetun
snnn, ett tulee syd pivllist vanhoillisten ja ajatella
vapaamielisten kanssa. Herttuattaren vasemmalla puolella istui mr.
Erskine of Treadley, vanha, miellyttv ja hyvin sivistynyt herra, joka
oli piintynyt siihen pahaan tapaan, ett hn aina oli vaiti, sen vuoksi,
niinkuin hn kerran oli selittnyt lady Agathalle, ett hn oli jo
sanonut kaikki sanottavansa ennenkuin hn oli tyttnyt
kolmeakymmentkn vuotta. Hnen naapurinaan oli mrs. Vandeleur, lady
Agathan vanha ystv, tysi pyhimys naisten parissa, mutta kovin
huolimaton puvussansa, aivan kuin huonosti sidottu rukouskirja. Onneksi
oli mrs. Vandeleurin toisella puolella lordi Faudel, hyvin nerokas,
keski-ikinen ja keskinkertainen kyky, yht kalju kuin ministerin puhe
alahuoneessa, ja hnen kanssaan mrs. Vandeleur puheli innokkaalla ja
vakavalla tavalla. Mutta tuo tapa oli lordi Henryn mielest anteeksi
antamaton erehdys, johon kaikki hyvt ihmiset tekivt itsens syypksi,
ja josta he eivt koskaan voineet pst.

"Me keskustelemme Dartmoor raukasta, lordi Henry", sanoi herttuatar ja
nykksi hnelle ystvllisesti ptn pydn yli. "Luuletteko, ett
hn todellakin nai tuon nuoren, ihastuttavan tytn?"

"Min luulen, ett tytt on pttnyt kosia hnt, herttuatar."

"Kuinka julmaa!" huudahti lady Agatha. "Se olisi todellakin estettv."

"Olen kuullut luotettavalta taholta, ett hnen isns tekee kauppaa
amerikkalaisilla rihkamatavaroilla", sanoi sir Thomas Burdon
ylimielisesti.

"Minun setni luuli ett hn harjoitti sikakauppaa, sir Thomas."

"Rihkamatavaraa! Mik on amerikkalaista rihkamatavaraa?" kysyi
herttuatar, kohottaen yls suuret ktens ja pannen erityist painoa
sanoihinsa.

"Amerikkalaisia romaaneja", vastasi lordi Henry ottaen eteens
peltopyyt.

Herttuatar joutui hmilleen.

"lk vlittk hnest, rakas ystv", kuiskasi lady Agatha. "Hn ei
koskaan puhu tytt totta."

"Kun Amerikka lydettiin", sanoi radikaali herra ja alkoi kertoa ikv
juttua. Samoinkuin kaikki, jotka koettavat perinpohjaisesti selvitt
aihettansa, hn ikvystytti kuulijoitansa. Herttuatar huokasi ja kytti
hyvkseen keskeyttmisoikeuttansa, "Jumala suokoon, ettei sit koskaan
olisi lydetty!" huudahti hn. "Tosiaankin, meidn nuorilla tytillmme
ei ole nykyn minknlaisia toiveita. Se on hyvin vrin."

"Ehkp Amerikkaa ei olekkaan lydetty", sanoi mr. Erskine. "Min
tahtoisin sanoa, ett se on vain paljastettu."

"Mutta min olen nhnyt nytteit alkuasukkaista", vastasi herttuatar
epvarmalla nell. "Minun tytyy tunnustaa, ett suurin osa heist on
varsin kauniita. Ja he kyvt mys hyvin puettuina. He tilaavat kaikki
pukunsa Parisista. Minkin soisin, ett minulla olisi varaa tehd
samoin."

"Sanotaan, ett kun hyvt amerikkalaiset kuolevat, niin he joutuvat
Parisiin", naureskeli Sir Thomas, jolla oli koko varasto kuluneita
sukkeluuksia.

"Todella! Ja minne joutuvat pahat amerikkalaiset kuoltuansa?" kysyi
herttuatar.

"He matkustavat Amerikkaan", mutisi lordi Henry.

Sir Thomas rypisti kulmiaan. "Minp luulen, ett teidn veljenne
pojalla on ennakkoluuloja tuota suurta maata kohtaan", hn sanoi lady
Agathalle. "Min olen matkustanut siell ristin ja rastin, vielp
tirehtrien omissa yksityisvaunuissa, sill tirehtrit tuollaisissa
tapauksissa ovat tavattoman kohteliaita. Min vakuutan teille, ett
matkustaminen siell on hyvin sivistv."

"Mutta pitk meidn nhd Chicago ollaksemme sivistyneit?" kysyi mr.
Erskine valittavalla nell. "Ei minulla ole en halua sellaiseen
matkaan."

Sir Thomas liikutti kttn. "Mr. Erskine of Treadley haluaa pit
maailman kirjahyllylln. Me kytnnn miehet tahdomme mieluummin itse
nhd kuin lukea kirjoja. Amerikkalaiset ovat hyvin hauskoja ihmisi. He
ovat niin tavattoman jrkevi. Minun luullakseni se on heidn
luonteenomaisin piirteens. Niin, mr. Erskine, tavattoman jrkev
vke. Min vakuutan teille, etteivt amerikkalaiset ole lainkaan
turhanpivisi."

"Kuinka hirve!" huudahti lordi Henry. "Min voin siet raakaa voimaa,
mutta raaka jrki on kerrassaan sietmtnt. Se on alhaista. Se on
paljoa alempana ymmrryst."

"Min en ksit teit oikein", sanoi sir Thomas punastuen.

"Min kyll ymmrrn, lordi Henry", mutisi mr. Erskine hymyillen.

"Paradoksit ovat tavallaan kyll hyvi..." toisti parooni.

"Oliko se paradoksi?" kysyi mr. Erskine. "En min sit luule. Ehkp
kyll. No niin, paradoksit johtavat totuuteen. Voidaksemme tutkia
todellisuutta tytyy meidn antaa sen tanssia nuoralla. Kun totuudet
muuttuvat konstintekijiksi, niin me voimme arvostella niit."

"Hyv Jumala!" sanoi lady Agatha, "kyllp te miehet osaatte todistaa!
Min en koskaan voi pst teidn puheistanne selville. Kuules, Harry,
sinuun min olen aivan suuttunut. Miksik sin olet kehoittanut meidn
rakasta mr. Dorian Graytmme luopumaan kyhistmme? Min vakuutan, ett
hn olisi oikea aarre meille. Me pitisimme niin paljon hnen
soitostansa."

"Min tahdon, ett hn soittaa minulle", sanoi lordi Henry nauraen ja
katsoi pydn alaphn, josta hnt kohtasi kirkas katse.

"Mutta nuo ihmisraukat Whitechapelissa ovat niin onnettomia", jatkoi
lady Agatha.

"Min tunnen myttuntoisuutta kaikkea muuta paitsi krsimyst kohtaan",
sanoi lordi Henry pudistaen olkapitn. "Se ei hert minun
myttuntoani. Se on liian rumaa; liian hirve ja liian surkeata. Tuo
nykyajan myttuntoisuus krsivi kohtaan on suorastaan sairaalloista.
Paljoa parempi, jos ihmisten myttuntoisuus kohdistuisi kauneuteen,
vreihin ja elmn iloihin. Mit vhemmn elmn varjopuolista puhutaan,
sit parempi."

"Mutta tytyyhn mynt, ett East Endin kyhlistn tila on hyvin
trke kysymys", huomautti sir Thomas vakavasti ptn pudistaen.

"Aivan niin", vastasi nuori lordi. "Se on orjakysymys, ja me koetamme
ratkaista sen hankkimalla orjille huvitusta."

Politikoitsija katsoi hneen ankarasti. "Mit muutoksia te sitten
ehdottaisitte?" hn kysyi.

Lordi Henry naurahti. "Min en tahdo muuttaa mitn Englannissa paitsi
ilmaa", hn vastasi. "Min tyydyn kerrassaan filosofisiin huomioihin.
Mutta koska yhdeksstoista vuosisata on tehnyt vararikon kuluttamalla
liiaksi myttuntoisuutta, niin ehdotan, ett kntyisimme tieteen
puoleen pstksemme entiseen tasapainoomme. Tunteista on se etu, ett
ne johtavat meit harhaan, ja tieteest se, ett se on tunteeton."

"Mutta meidn edesvastuumme on hyvin raskas", sanoi mrs. Vandeleur
arasti.

"rettmn raskas", toisti lady Agatha.

Lordi Henry katsoi mr. Erskineen. "Ihmiskunta katsoo kaikkea liian
vakavalta kannalta. Siin on maailman ensiminen synti. Jos luolaihminen
olisi tuntenut naurua, niin historia varmaan olisi muuttunut aivan
toiseksi."

"Sep vasta oli lohduttavaa", liverteli herttuatar. "Joka kerta kun kyn
teidn ttinne tervehtimss, tunnen min omantunnon vaivoja, sill
min en ole yhtn huvitettu East Endin asukkaista. Tst lhin min
voin punastumatta katsoa hnt silmiin."

"Punastuminen kaunistaa suuresti, herttuatar", huomautti lordi Henry.

"Vain nuoria ihmisi", vastasi herttuatar. "Kun minun ikiseni vanha
nainen punastuu, niin on se paha merkki. Oi! lordi Henry, jospa voisitte
sanoa minulle, miten voi tulla uudestaan nuoreksi."

Lordi Henry mietti hetken aikaa. "Voitteko palauttaa mieleenne jotakin
suurta erehdyst, johon nuoruudessa olette tehnyt itsenne syypksi,
herttuatar?" hn kysyi, luoden pydn yli katseensa hneen.

"Pelknp useitakin", hn vastasi.

"Tehk ne sitten uudestaan", lordi Henry sanoi vakavasti. "Voi saada
nuoruutensa takaisin uudistamalla vain kaikki entiset hulluutensa."

"Ihana periaate!" huudahti herttuatar. "Minp koetan toteuttaa sen
kytnnss."

"Vaarallinen periaate!" kuului ni sir Thomasin huulilta. Lady Agatha
pudisti ptn, mutta oli samalla varsin huvitettu. Mr. Erskine
kuunteli.

"Niin", jatkoi lordi Henry, "se on elmn suurimpia salaisuuksia.
Nykyn useimmat ihmiset kuolevat jonkunmoisen kiduttavan terveen jrjen
seurauksista ja huomaavat liian myhn, ett ihminen katuu kaikkea
muuta maailmassa paitsi omia erehdyksin."

Nauru kajahti ympri pyt.

Lordi Henry alkoi vallattomasti leikitell tuolla ajatuksella. Hn
heitteli sit ilmassa ja knteli sit. Hn psti sen ksistn ja
tarttui siihen jlleen kiinni, vritti sit mielikuvituksellaan ja antoi
sille paradoksin siivet. Hnen puhuessaan mielettmyyden ylistys kohosi
filosofiaksi, ja filosofia itse nuoreni, ji kuuntelemaan nautinnon
hurjaa musiikkia ja pukeutui viinintahraamaan pukuun ja
murattikynnksiin. Se tanssi kuin bakhantitar yli elmn kukkuloiden ja
pilkkasi hidasta Silenusta hnen jrkevyydestns. Todellisuus pakeni
sen tielt kuin pelstynyt metsn elin. Sen valkeat jalat tallasivat
jttilispuserrinta, jonka ress viisas Omar istuu, kunnes kuohuva
rypleneste kohosi purppuranpunaisena vaahtona hnen paljasten
jsentens ymprill tai vuoti punaisena kuohuna pitkin astian mustia,
niljakkaisia, kosteita kylki. Se oli ihmeellinen sepitelm. Hn tunsi
ett Dorian Grayn silmt olivat kiintyneet hneen, ja se tieto, ett
hnen kuulijoidensa joukossa oli yksi, jota hn halusi tenhota, teroitti
hnen sukkeluuttansa ja vritti hnen mielikuvitustansa. Hn oli
loistava, tenhova, vastustamaton. Hn sai kuulijat unohtamaan itsens ja
he seurasivat hymyillen hnen pillins nt. Dorian Gray ei voinut
irroittaa katsettaan hnest, vaan istui kuin lumouksen vallassa
hymyhuulin ja silmt ihmetyksest synkkin.

kki todellisuus astui koreaan puetun palvelijan haamussa huoneesen, ja
tm ilmoitti herttuattarelle, ett hnen vaununsa odottivat ulkona.
Herttuatar vnsi ksin naurettavan eptoivoisena. "Miten ikv!"
huudahti hn. "Minun tytyy menn hakemaan miestni klubista ja lhte
hnen kanssansa johonkin mielettmn kokoukseen, jossa hnen tulee
johtaa puhetta. Jos min viivyn, niin hn suuttuu, enk min sied
kohtauksia kun minulla on tm phine pss. Se on siihen aivan liian
hento. Kova sana voisi pilata sen. Minun tytyy lhte, rakas Agatha.
Hyvsti, lordi Henry, te olette ihastuttava ja hirven epsiveellinen.
En todellakaan tied mit sanoisin teidn mielipiteistnne. Teidn pit
tulla meille pivllisille jonakuna iltana. Esimerkiksi tiistaina.
Oletteko vapaa tiistaina?"

"Teidn thtenne min syrjyttisin kaikki muut kutsut, herttuatar",
sanoi lordi Henry kumartaen.

"Se on hyvin kaunista, mutta mys hyvin vrin", sanoi hn. "Muistakaa
siis tulla", ja hn lehahti pois huoneesta lady Agathan sek toisten
naisten seuratessa hnt.

Kun lordi Henry oli istunut jlleen paikalleen, niin mr. Erskine kiersi
pydn ympri ja istuutuen hnen viereens laski ktens hnen
ksivarrelleen.

"Te puhutte kuin kirjasta", hn sanoi, "miksi te ette kirjoita kirjoja?"

"Min luen liian suurella halulla kirjoja, jotta viitsisin niit
kirjoittaa, mr. Erskine. Tahtoisin kerran kirjoittaa romaanin, romaanin,
joka olisi yht kaunis kuin persialainen matto, mutta mys yht
vrennetty. Mutta Englannissa ei ole muuta kirjallista yleis, kuin
se, joka lukee sanomalehti, rukouskirjoja ja tietosanakirjoja. Kaikista
maailman kansoista englantilaiset vhimmin ksittvt kirjallisuuden
kauneutta."

"Pelkn teidn olevan oikeassa", vastasi mr. Erskine. "Minullakin oli
ennen kirjallista kunnianhimoa, mutta luovuin siit aikoja sitten. Ja
nyt, rakas nuori ystvni, jos sallitte ett nimitn teit siksi,
tahtoisin kysy teilt, tokko te todellakin tarkoititte kaikkea sit
mit te sken sanoitte meille?"

"Min en muista en mit min sanoin", naureskeli lordi Henry. "Oliko
se kovin pahaa?"

"Hyvin pahaa tosiaankin. Minun tytyy tunnustaa, ett te olette hyvin
vaarallinen, ja jos jotakin sattuisi tapahtumaan meidn rakkaalle
herttuattarellemme, niin teill on siit suurin edesvastaus. Mutta min
tahtoisin puhua teidn kanssanne elmst. Se sukupolvi, johon min
synnyin, oli ikv. Jonkun kerran kun olette vsynyt Lontoosen, tulkaa
Treadleyhin ja selittk minulle nautinnon filosofiaanne burgundiviinin
ress, jota minulla on onni omistaa."

"Suurimmalla mielihyvll. Kutsu Treadleyhin on suuri kunnia. Siell on
tydellinen isnt ja tydellinen kirjasto."

"Te sen vasta tydentisitte", vastasi vanha herra kohteliaasti
kumartaen. "Ja nyt minun tytyy sanoa jhyviset rakkaalle tdillenne.
Minun on mentv Athenaeumiin. Thn aikaan me siell nukumme."

"Kaikkiko, mr. Erskine?"

"Kaikki neljkymment neljsskymmeness nojatuolissa. Me harjoittelemme
tulevaa englantilaista kirjallisuusakatemiaa varten."

Lordi Henry nousi yls nauraen. "Min lhden Hyde Parkiin", hn sanoi.

Astuessaan ulos ovesta Dorian Gray kosketti hnt ksivarteen. "Saanko
min seurata teit", hn mutisi.

"Min luulin, ett olitte luvannut menn Basil Hallwardin luo", vastasi
lordi Henry.

"Min tulen mielemmin teidn kanssanne; niin, minun tytyy saada olla
teidn kanssanne. Sallikaa minun tulla. Ja lupaattehan puhua minulle
koko ajan? Ei kukaan osaa puhua sill tavalla kuin te."

"Ah, tnn min olen kylliksi puhunut", sanoi lordi Henry hymyillen.
"Nyt min tahdon vain katsella elm. Tehk minulle seuraa, jos
haluatte."




LUKU IV.


Ern iltapivn kuukautta myhemmin Dorian Gray loikoili komeassa
nojatuolissa lordi Henryn pieness kirjastohuoneessa Mayfairissa. Se oli
tavallansa ihastuttava huone, jossa seini myten kulki korkea
oliivivrinen tammilaudoitus. Kattolista oli kellertv ja katossa oli
kipsikoristeita. Tiilinpunertavalle huopamatolle oli siroteltu useita
pitkripsisi persialaisia pikkumattoja. Pienell atlaspuisella pydll
seisoi Clodionin pieni pystykuva ja sen vieress kappale Clovis Even
kirjaa "Les Cent Nouvelles", joka oli omistettu Margareta
Valoisilaiselle ja jonka kannella oli kullattuja tuhatkaunoja,
kuningattaren symbolikukkia. Uunin reunustalla oli kirjavia tulpaneja
suurissa, sinisiss, kiinalaisissa maljoissa, ja pienten
lyijykehyksisten ikkunaruutujen kautta virtasi Lontoon kesisen pivn
aprikosivrinen valo huoneesen.

Lordi Henry ei ollut viel kotona, Hn tuli snnllisesti liian
myhn, hnen periaatteittensa mukaan snnllisyys oli ajanhukkaa.
Nuorukainen nytti hiukan ikvystyneelt selaillessaan haluttomasti
hienoa kuvallista "Manon Lescaut" teosta, jonka hn oli lytnyt
kirjahyllylt. Ludvig XIV:nnen aikuisen kellon yksitoikkoinen tikutus
kiusoitti hnt. Pari kertaa hn oli lhtemss.

Vihdoin hn kuuli askelia ulkoapin ja ovi avautui. "Kuinka myhn sin
tulet, Harry!" hn mutisi.

"Paha kyll se ei ole Harry, mr. Gray", vastasi terv ni.

Dorian Gray katsoi kki taakseen ja nousi pystyyn. "Suokaa anteeksi.
Min luulin --"

"Te luulitte minun mieheni tulevan. Se on vain hnen vaimonsa. Sallikaa
minun esitt itseni teille. Min tunnen teidt varsin hyvin
valokuvienne mukaan. Luullakseni minun miehellni on niit
seitsemntoista eri lajia."

"Seitsemntoistako, lady Henry?"

"No, kahdeksantoista sitten. Ja min nin teidt vastikn ooperassa
hnen kanssaan." Hn nauroi hermostuneesti puhuessaan ja katseli hnt
haparoivilla lemmikki-silmilln. Hn oli merkillinen nainen. Hnen
pukunsa teki sen vaikutuksen iknkuin hn olisi valmistanut sen
suuttumuksen vallassa ja pukenut sen myrskyss ylleen. Tavallisesti hn
oli aina rakastunut johonkuhun, ja kun hn ei koskaan voittanut
vastarakkautta, niin kaikki hnen illusioninsa olivat tallella. Hn
koetti nytt taiteelliselta, mutta hnen ulkomuotonsa teki vain
huolimattoman vaikutuksen. Hnen nimens oli Viktoria, ja kirkossa
kynti oli muuttunut hnelle suorastaan kiihkoksi.

"Nyteltiin kai 'Lohengrinia', lady Henry, vai kuinka?"

"Aivan niin; minun rakasta 'Lohengrinini'. Min pidn Wagnerin
musiikista enemmn kuin mistn muusta. Se on niin nekst, ett koko
ajan voi puhua muiden kuulematta. Ja se on suuri etu, eik totta, mr.
Gray?"

Sama hermostunut, katkonainen nauru kajahti jlleen hnen huuliltaan ja
hnen sormensa alkoivat leikitell pitkll kilpikonnanluisella
paperiveitsell.

Dorian pudisti nauraen ptn. "En usko olevani aivan samaa mielt kuin
te, lady Henry. Min en koskaan puhu musiikin aikana -- en ainakaan
hyvn musiikin aikana. Ainoastaan huonoa musiikkia tulee tappaa
keskustelulla."

"Niin, se on Harryn mielipide, eik totta, mr. Gray? Min saan aina
kuulla Harryn mielipiteit hnen ystviltns. Se onkin ainoa keino,
jolla psen niiden perille. Mutta lk luulko etten min pitisi
hyvst musiikista. Min ihailen sit, mutta min pelkn sit myskin.
Se tekee minut liian romantiseksi. Min olen suorastaan jumaloinut
pianotaiteilijoita -- vlist kahta samalla haavaa, niinkuin Harry
vitt. En tied, mik heiss on. Ehkp syy on siin, ett he ovat
ulkomaalaisia. He ovat kaikki ulkomaalaisia, eik totta? Nekin, jotka
ovat Englannissa syntyneet, muuttuvat ulkomaalaisiksi jonkun ajan
kuluttua, eik totta? Siin he tekevt hyvin viisaasti, ja samalla se on
hyvin imartelevaa taiteelle. Siten taide muuttuu kokonaan
kosmopoliitiseksi, eik totta? Te ette ole koskaan ollut minun
vastaanotoissani, vai kuinka, mr. Gray? Teidn tytyy tulla. Min en voi
tarjota orkideoja, mutta min en sst vaivojani saadakseni luokseni
ulkomaalaisia. He tekevt huoneet niin taiteellisiksi. Mutta tuossahan
on Harry! Harry, min etsin sinua, aioin kysy jotakin sinulta -- en
en muista mit -- ja min lysin mr. Grayn tlt. Meill on ollut
niin hauska keskustelu musiikista. Meill on aivan samat mielipiteet.
Ei; ne taisivatkin olla aivan vastakkaiset. Mutta hn on hyvin
huvittava. Olen kovin mielissni hnen tuttavuudestaan."

"Sep hauskaa, kultaseni", sanoi lordi Henry kohottaen tummia, kaarevia
kulmakarvojaan ja katsellen naureskellen kumpaistakin. "Olen pahoillani,
Dorian, ett satuin viipymn. Kvin katsomassa erst vanhaa brokadia
Wardour Streetin varrella, ja min tingin sit tuntikausia. Nykyn
ihmiset osaavat antaa hinnan kaikelle, mutta ei arvoa millekn."

"Minun tytyy, paha kyll lhte", huudahti lady Henry, katkaisten
nettmyyden killisell naurullaan. "Olen luvannut menn herttuattaren
kanssa ajamaan. Hyvsti, mr. Gray. Hyvsti, Harry. Sin syt kai
pivllist ulkona, vai kuinka? Niin minkin. Ehk nen sinut lady
Thornburyn luona."

"Mahdollisesti, kultaseni", sanoi lordi Henry sulkien oven hnen
jlkeens, hnen livahtaessaan ulos huoneesta aivan kuin paradiisilintu,
joka kaiken yt on ollut ulkona sateessa, jtten heikon jasmiinihajun
jlkeens. Sitten lordi Henry sytytti paperossin ja heittytyi sohvalle.

"l koskaan nai naista, jolla on oljenkeltainen tukka, Dorian", hn
sanoi vedettyn pari sauhua.

"Miksik, Harry?"

"Siksi, ett ne ovat niin hempemielisi."

"Mutta min pidn hempemielisist ihmisist."

"l koskaan mene naimisiin, Dorian. Miehet naivat siksi, ett he ovat
vsyneet; naiset siksi, ett he ovat uteliaat: kumpaisetkin pettyvt."

"En min luule menevni koskaan naimisiin, Harry. Min olen liiaksi
rakastunut. Se on sinun aforismejasi. Min toteutan sen kytnnss,
niinkuin kaiken muunkin, mink sin sanot."

"Keneenk sin olet rakastunut?" kysyi lordi Henry hetken kuluttua.

"Erseen nyttelijttreen", sanoi Dorian Gray punastuen.

Lordi Henry kohautti olkapitn. "Se on liian tavallinen alku."

"Et sanoisi sit, jos nkisit hnet, Harry."

"Kuka hn on?"

"Hnen nimens on Sibyl Vane."

"En ole koskaan kuullut hnest."

"Ei kukaan tunnekkaan hnt. Mutta kerran viel hn tulee tunnetuksi.
Hn on nero."

"Rakas ystv, ei kukaan nainen ole nero. Naiset ovat vain kauniita. Ei
heill ole koskaan mitn sanottavaa, mutta he sanovat sen niin
ihastuttavalla tavalla. Naiset edustavat aineen voittoa jrjen yli,
samoinkuin miehet jrjen voittoa siveyden yli."

"Harry, kuinka sin voit tuolla tavalla?"

"Rakas Dorian, se on aivan totta. Min parasta aikaa analyseeraan
naista, jotta tytyyhn minun se tiet. Aine ei ole niin monimutkainen
kuin min luulin. Olen tullut siihen johtoptkseen, ett on olemassa
vain kahta lajia naisia, rumia ja maalattuja. Rumat naiset ovat hyvin
hydyllisi. Jos tahdot saavuttaa hyvn maineen, niin sinun ei tarvitse
muuta kuin menn heidn kanssaan pivllist symn. Tuo toinen laji
naisia on hurmaava. Mutta heill on yksi vika kuitenkin. He maalaavat
itsen nyttkseen nuorilta. Meidn esi-itimme maalasivat itsen
voidakseen keskustella loistavasti. Punavri ja sukkeluus kvivt
tavallisesti ksikdess. Tuo aika on ollut ja mennyt. Niin kauan kuin
nainen voi nytt tytrtn kymment vuotta nuoremmalta, on hn tysin
tyytyvinen. Mit keskusteluun tulee, niin Lontoossa on vain viisi
naista, joiden kanssa maksaa vaivaa jutella, ja kaksi niist ei voi
esiinty siivossa seurassa. Vaan kerroppa minulle kuitenkin tuosta
nerosta. Kauanko olet tuntenut hnet?"

"Oi, Harry, sinun mielipiteesi saattavat minut kauhistumaan."

"l siit huoli. Kauanko olet tuntenut hnet?"

"Noin kolme viikkoa."

"Ja miss sin hnet tapasit?"

"Min kerron sinulle, Harry; mutta sin et saa pilkata minua. Joka
tapauksessa, se ei koskaan olisi voinut tapahtua, jollen olisi kohdannut
sinua. Sin hertit minussa halun tutustua elmn eri puoliin.
Pivkausia sen jlkeen kuin tutustuin sinuun, kuohui veri minun
suonissani. Jos kuljeskelin Hyde Parkissa tai kyskentelin pitkin
Piccadilly, niin tarkastelin joka ainoaa, joka kulki ohitseni ja
ihmettelin itsekseni hurjan uteliaisuuden vallassa millaistahan elm
he viettivt. Muutamat herttivt ihastustani. Toiset tyttivt minut
kauhulla. Ilma oli tynn hienoa myrkky. Min etsin innokkaasti
kiihoituksia... No niin, ern iltana kello seitsemn tienoissa min
ptin lhte etsimn jotakin seikkailua. Min tunsin, ett meidn
harmaassa, jttilis-Lontoossamme, jossa oli niin suunnattoman paljon
ihmisi ja likaisia syntisi ja suloisia syntej, niinkuin sin kerran
sanoit, ett tuossa jttiliskaupungissa tytyi olla mys jotakin minun
varaltani. Min kuvailin mielessni tuhansia eri asioita. Vaara
sellaisenaan hurmasi minua. Minun mieleeni muistui mit sin olit
sanonut minulle tuona ihanana iltana, jolloin me ensi kertaa simme
yhdess pivllist, ja jolloin sin vitit ett kauneuden etsint oli
elmn todellinen salaisuus. En tied mit min odotin, mutta min
lksin kymn kaupungin it-osaa kohti, ja eksyin keskelle likaisten
katujen ja synkkien, ruokottomien torien labyrintti. Puoli yhdeksn
aikana kuljin lystillisen, pienen teatterin ohi, jonka edustalla suuret
kaasuliekit leimuilivat ja riket ilmoituslehdet prameilivat. Inhottava
juutalainen hullunkurisessa takissaan, jommoista en ennen elissni ole
nhnyt, seisoi oven edustalla polttaen pahanhajuista sikariaan. Hnell
oli rasvankiiltvt kiharat ja suuri timantti likaisessa paidanrinnassa.
'Tahdotteko aition, my lord?' kysyi hn nhdessn minut ja nosti
hattuaan matelevalla kohteliaisuuvella. Hn huvitti minua, Harry. Hn
oli niin hirvittv. Sin naurat minulle, sen tiedn, mutta min menin
todellakin sisn ja maksoin kokonaisen guinean aitiosta. En viel
tnnkn voi selitt mink vuoksi sen tein. Ja jollen olisi sit
tehnyt -- rakas Harry, jollen olisi sit tehnyt, niin minulta olisi
mennyt elmni onnellisin seikkailu hukkaan. Min nen, ett naurat.
Sin olet julma!"

"En min naura, Dorian; en ainakaan naura sinulle. Mutta sinun ei
pitisi sanoa elmsi onnellisin seikkailu. Sanoisit mielemmin elmsi
ensiminen seikkailu. Sin saat aina osaksesi rakkautta. Ne ihmiset ovat
etuoikeudetut kokemaan suuria intohimoja, joilla ei ole mitn
tekemist. Se on tyhjntoimittajien ainoa etu. l pelsty. Sinun
varaltasi on viel paljon ihmeellist elmss. Tm on vain ensiminen
alku."

"Arveletko ett min olen niin pintapuolinen luonteeltani?" huudahti
Dorian Gray pahoillaan.

"En; pinvastoin sin olet syv luonne."

"Mitenk sin tarkoitat?"

"Rakas ystv, ne ihmiset, jotka rakastavat vain kerran elmssn, ne
ovat pintapuolisia. Sit, mit he sanovat uskollisuudeksi, sit min
nimitn joko jrmisyydeksi tai mielikuvituksen puutteeksi. Uskollisuus
tunne-elmss on samaa kuin johdonmukaisuus henkisess elmss --
aivan yksinkertaisesti vain vararikon tunnustus. Uskollisuus! Min
selitn sinulle jonakuna pivn sen ksitteen. Siihen sisltyy
omistamishalu. On paljon maailmassa, jota me halusta heittisimme
luotamme, jollemme pelkisi, ett muut sen omistaisivat. Mutta min en
tahdo keskeytt sinua. Jatka kertomustasi."

"No niin, min jouduin hirven, pieneen yksityisaitioon ja nenni
edess oli aistiton esirippu. Min tarkastelin salia aition verhojen
takaa. Se oli surkea laitos, tynn lemmen jumalia ja runsaudensarvia,
aivan kuin jokin kolmannen luokan hkakku. Galleria ja takapermanto
olivat tpsen tynn, mutta sit vastoin parhaat paikat perll olivat
tyhjt ja tuskin ainoatakaan henke etuparvella. Naiset tarjoilivat
appelsiinej ja sokerijuomaa, ja kaikkialta kuului phkiniden
puremista."

"Siell lienee ollut samantapaista kuin englantilaisen draaman
kukoistusaikana."

"Aivan sellaista, luullakseni, ja hyvin tuskastuttavaa. Min aloin jo
tuumia mit minun pitisi tehd, kun silmni osuivat ohjelmaan. Mit
sin luulet ett siell nyteltiin, Harry?"

"Varmaan 'Hullu poika eli Mykk vaikka viaton' kappaletta. Meidn
esi-ismme olivat ihastuneet senkaltaisiin kappaleihin, jollen erehdy.
Mit kauemmin min eln, Dorian, sit selvemmin min huomaan, ett se
mik oli hyv meidn esi-isillemme, se ei ole hyv meille. Taiteessa,
samoin kuin politiikassa _les grandpres ont toujours tort_." [Iso-ist
ovat aina vrss.]

"Mutta tm kappale oli kylliksi hyv meillekin, Harry. He nyttelivt
'Romeota ja Juliaa'. Minun tytyy mynt ett minua harmitti, kun
huomasin Shakespearea nyteltvn tuollaisessa pesss. Mutta samalla se
minua jollakin tavalla huvittikin. Joka tapauksessa min ptin odottaa
ensimist nytst. Orkesteri oli hirvittv. Sit johti nuori
juutalainen, joka istui kurjan pianon ress, ja yksin jo sekin oli
karkoittaa minut pois. Mutta vihdoin esirippu kohosi ja nytnt alkoi.
Romeota nytteli lihava, vanhemmanpuolinen herra, jonka kulmakarvat
olivat korkilla noetut. Hn puhui hyvin traagillisella, aivan
sortuneella nell ja hnen vartalonsa oli kuin oluttynnyri. Mercutio
oli yht huono. Hnen osaansa nytteli koomiko, joka vh-vli pisti
omiaan vliin ja oli erinomaisissa vleiss takapermannon yleisn
kanssa. He olivat molemmat yht kehnot kuin itse nyttmllepanokin,
joka nytti olevan markkinapaikalta kotoisin. Mutta Julia! Harry,
kuvaile mielesssi tytt, joka on tuskin seitsentoistavuotias,
tuollaisia pieni kukkamaisia kasvoja, pient kreikkalaista pt, jota
ympri tumman-ruskeat palmikot, silmi, joiden tummansinisest
syvyydest intohimo likehtii, ja huulia, jotka punoittavat kuin ruusun
lehdet. Hn oli suloisin olento mit ikn olen nhnyt. Sin sanoit
kerran, ettei paatos tee sinuun mitn vaikutusta, mutta ett kauneus,
vain pelkk kauneus saattoi nostaa kyyneleet silmiisi. Min sanon
sinulle, Harry, minun oli vaikea nhd tuota tytt kyynelsumulta, joka
kohosi silmieni eteen. Ja hnen nens -- en ole koskaan sellaista
nt kuullut. Aluksi se oli hyvin hiljainen, tynn syv, pehme
sointua, joka siveli korvia. Sitten se hiukan kohosi ja soi kuin huilun
tai kaukaisen ooboen ni. Puutarhakohtauksessa oli samaa vrjv
kiihkoa, kuin satakielen laulussa juuri ennen aamun sarastusta. Ja
myhemmin siin hetkittin oli viulun hurjaa intohimoa. Sin tiedt
miten ni voi kiihoittaa mielt. Sinun ja Sibyl Vanen nt en voisi
koskaan unohtaa. Sulkiessani silmnikin min ne kuulen, ja
kumpaisellakin on eri svyns. En tied, kumpaako minun tulee seurata.
Miksi en rakastaisi hnt? Harry, min rakastan hnt. Hn on minulle
kaikki kaikessa. Joka ilta min kyn hnt katsomassa. Milloin hn on
Rosalinda, milloin Imogen. Olen nhnyt hnen kuolevan synkss
italialaisessa haudassa, imien myrkky rakastettunsa huulilta. Olen
seurannut hnt halki Ardenin metsien, joissa hn harhaili somana
poikana, housut ja takki yll ja lakki pss. Hn on astunut
mielipuolena rikoksellisen kuninkaan eteen, antanut hnen kantaa
katumuksen taakkaa ja maistaa katkeria yrttej. Hn on ollut viaton ja
kateuden mustat kourat ovat kuristaneet hnen hienoa kurkkuansa. Olen
nhnyt hnet kaikenikisen ja kaikissa puvuissa. Tavalliset naiset
eivt koskaan vetoa mielikuvitukseemme. He eivt koskaan voi kohota
ympristns yli. Ei mikn valo voi muuttaa heit. On yht helppoa
tuntea heidn sielujaan kuin heidn hattujaan. Niiden perille voi aina
pst. Ei niiss piile minknlaista salaperisyytt. He rakastavat
aamulla Hyde Parkissa ja juttelevat teepydn ress iltapuolella.
Heill on stereotyypinen hymyilyns ja hieno kytksens. He ovat aivan
lpinkyvi. Mutta nyttelij! Kuinka erilainen nyttelij voi olla!
Harry! Miksi sin et sanonut minulle ett nyttelij on ainoa, jota
maksaa vaivaa rakastaa?"

"Senthden ett olen rakastanut niin monta nyttelij, Dorian."

"Niin, hirveit olentoja, joiden hiukset ovat vrjtyt ja kasvot
maalatut."

"l tuomitse vrjttyj hiuksia ja maalattuja kasvoja. Joskus ne voivat
olla hyvinkin hurmaavia", sanoi lordi Henry.

"Olen pahoillani ett puhuin sinulle Sibyl Vanest."

"Sin et olisi voinut olla puhumatta, Dorian. Niinkauan kuin elt, sin
kerrot minulle kaikki mit sin teet."

"Niin Harry, min luulen ett olet oikeassa. En voi salata sinulta
mitn. Sinulla on niin suuri vaikutus minuun. Jos min tekisin joskus
jonkun rikoksen, niin min tunnustaisin sen sinulle. Sin ymmrtisit
minua."

"Sellaiset ihmiset kuin sin -- elmn hemmoitellut lempilapset -- eivt
tee rikoksia, Dorian. Mutta min olen sittenkin hyvin kiitollinen
sinulle kohteliaisuudestasi. Ja kerro nyt minulle -- ojennappa nuo
tulitikut, kiitos -- miss suhteissa sin oikeastaan olet Sibyl Vaneen?"

Dorian Gray hyppsi pystyyn punoittavin poskin ja polttavin silmin.
"Harry! Sibyl Vane on pyh!"

"Vain pyhi olentoja maksaa vaivaa kosketella, Dorian", sanoi lordi
Henry, jonka ness vrhteli hiukan paatosta. "Mutta miksi olisit
pahoillasi? Min toivon ett kerran saat hnet omaksesi. Kun ihminen on
rakastunut, niin aluksi pett aina itsens ja lopuksi pett muita.
Sit maailma nimitt romantillisuudeksi. Sin kai ainakin olet tehnyt
hnen tuttavuuttansa?"

"Tietysti min tunnen hnet. Ensi iltana kun olin teatterissa, tuo
inhottava, vanha juutalainen tuli nytnnn jlkeen minun aitiooni ja
tarjoutui ohjaamaan minua kulissien taakse ja esittmn minut tytlle.
Min raivostuin ja sanoin hnelle, ett Julia oli kuollut satoja vuosia
sitten, ja ett hnen ruumiinsa lepsi marmorihaudassa Veronassa. Hn
nytti niin llistyneelt, ett hn varmaan luuli minun juoneen liiaksi
shampanjaa."

"Se ei minua ihmetyt."

"Sitten hn kysyi, kirjoitinko min johonkin sanomalehteen. Min
vastasin etten edes lue niit. Hn nytti tulevan siit kovin
pahoillensa, ja sanoi ett kaikki teatteriarvostelijat olivat
liittoutuneet hnt vastaan ja ett kaikki arvostelijat olivat
ostettavissa."

"En luule, ett hn oli vrss. Mutta toiselta puolen, ptten heidn
ulkomuodostansa, useimmat eivt ole kovin kalliita."

"No niin, hn nytti luulevan, ett ne olisivat hnen varojensa
ylpuolella", naureskeli Dorian. "Mutta tulia aljettiin jo sammuttaa
teatterissa ja minun tytyi lhte. Hn tarjosi minulle sikarin, jota
hn kehui erinomaisen hyvksi, mutta min kieltydyin. Seuraavana iltana
min tietysti menin sinne uudestaan. Nhdessn minut, ukko kumarsi
minulle syvsti ja vakuutti, ett olin aulis taiteen suosija. Hn on
hyvin ikv mies, vaikka hn niin suuresti ihaileekin Shakespearea. Hn
kertoi kerran hyvin kopeana minulle ett 'runoilija', niinkuin hn aina
Shakespearea nimitti, oli yksin syyp hnen viiteen vararikkoonsa. Hn
piti sit jonkinlaisena kunniana."

"Se oli todellakin kunnia, rakas Dorian -- suuri kunnia. Useimmat
ihmiset tekevt vararikon sen vuoksi, ett he ovat liian syvsti
uponneet elmn proosaan. Mutta on kunniakasta joutua vararikkoon
runouden vuoksi. Milloin sin ensi kerran puhuttelit miss Sibyl Vane?"

"Kolmantena iltana. Hn oli nytellyt Rosalindan osaa. Min en voinut
olla menemtt kulissien taakse. Olin heittnyt hnelle kukkia ja hn
oli katsonut minuun. Ainakin min oletin sit. Vanha juutalainen ei
antanut minulle rauhaa. Hn nytti pttneen, ett hn veisi minut
nyttmlle ja min suostuin. Eik se ollut lystikst, etten min
tahtonut tutustua hneen?"

"Ei; en min sit arvele."

"No, mutta miksik ei, rakas Harry?"

"Sen min sanon sinulle toisten. Nyt min tahdon kuulla tytst."

"Sibylistk? Oi, hn oli niin arka ja niin suloinen. Hness on jotakin
niin lapsekasta. Hn katsoi minuun suurin, hmmstynein silmin kun
sanoin mielipiteeni hnen esiintymisestns, ja hn nytti olevan aivan
tiedoton omasta kyvystns. Luulen ett me olimme kumpikin hyvin
hermostuneet. Vanha juutalainen irvisteli tomuisen lmpin oven suussa
ja kehui meit molempia sill aikaa kuin me katselimme toisiamme kuin
kaksi lasta. Juutalainen tahtoi kaiken mokommin kutsua minua my
lordiksi, jotta minun tytyi vakuuttaa Sibylille, etten ollut mitn sen
kaltaista. Sibyl sanoi aivan yksinkertaisesti minulle: 'te nyttte
pikemmin prinssilt. Min kutsun teit satuprinssiksi'."

"Totta tosiaan, Dorian, miss Sibyl osaa sanoa kohteliaisuuksia."

"Sin et ymmrr hnt, Harry. Hnen mielestn min olin vain joku
nytelmkappaleessa esiintyv henkil. Hn ei tunne elm yhtn. Hn
el itins kanssa, kuihtuneen, vshtneen olennon, joka ensi iltana
nytteli lady Capuletin osaa jonkinlaisessa kuluneessa aamupuvussa, ja
nytt ennen viettneen parempia pivi".

"Min tunnen tuollaisen ulkomuodon. Se painostaa aina minun mieltni",
mutisi lordi Henry, tarkastellen sormuksiaan.

"Juutalainen tahtoi kertoa minulle hnen elmntarinansa, vaan min
sanoin, ettei se minua huvittanut."

"Siin teit oikein. Muitten ihmisten kokemukset ovat aina hyvin ikvi."

"Min en vlit kenestkn muusta kuin Sibylist. Mit minua hnen
alkuperns liikuttaa? Kiireest kantaphn asti hn on kerrassaan
jumalallinen. Joka ilta min kyn hnt teatterissa katsomassa, ja ilta
illalta hn on yh ihanampi".

"Siinp siis syy, miksi et en koskaan sy pivllist minun kanssani.
Min arvasin ett olit joutunut johonkin rakkausseikkailuun. Ja niinp
niinkin, vaikket aivan sellaiseen kuin olin luullut."

"Rakas Harry, symmehn me joka piv joko aamiaista tai pivllist
yhdess, ja olenhan ollut useita kertoja sinun kanssasi ooperassa",
sanoi Dorian ihmettelev katse sinisiss silmissn.

"Sin tulet aina niin hirven myhn."

"No niin, en voi olla menemtt Sibyli katsomaan", hn sanoi, "vaikka
vain yhden nytnnn ajaksi. Min himoitsen hnen lsnoloansa. Ja kun
ajattelen sit ihmeellist sielua, joka on ktkettyn tuohon pieneen,
norsunluiseen ruumiisen, niin tunnen hartautta."

"Tnn sin varmaan voit tulla pivllisille minun kanssani, Dorian?"

Hn pudisti ptn. "Tn iltana hn on Imogen", hn vastasi, "ja
huomenna Julia."

"Milloin hn on Sibyl Vane?"

"Ei koskaan."

"Onnittelen sinua."

"Kuinka julma sin olet! Hn on kaikki maailman sankarittaret yhdess
personassa. Hn on enemmn kuin yksil. Sin naurat, mutta min vakuutan
sinulle ett hn on nero. Min rakastan hnt ja minun tytyy voittaa
hnen vastarakkautensa. Sin, joka tunnet kaikki elmn salaisuudet,
sano miten voisin lumota Sibyl Vanen, jotta hn rakastaisi minua! Min
tahdon tehd Romeon mustasukkaiseksi. Min tahtoisin, ett kaikki, jotka
ovat kuolleet rakkaudesta, kuuntelisivat katein mielin meidn nauruamme.
Min tahtoisin, ett meidn intohimomme puhaltaisi eloon heidn tuhkansa
ja herttisi heidt krsimn. Hyv Jumala, Harry, kuinka min hnt
jumaloin!" Hn kulki puhuessaan edes-takaisin huoneen permannolla.
Kiihke puna hohti hnen poskillansa. Hn oli rettmn kiihkoissaan.

Lordi Henry katseli hnt hyvin huvitettuna. Kuinka toisenlainen hn oli
nyt, tuo arka, pelstynyt poika, jonka hn oli tavannut Basil Hallwardin
atelierissa! Hnen luonteensa oli kehittynyt kuin kukka, oli kantanut
tulipunaisia kukkia. Salaisesta piilopaikastaan hnen sielunsa oli
sukeltanut esiin ja kohdannut himon tielln.

"Ja mit sin aiot tehd?" kysyi lordi Henry vihdoin.

"Min tahdon ett sin ja Basil tulette jonakuna iltana minun kanssani
teatteriin hnt katsomaan. Min en pelk vhintkn seurauksia. Te
varmaan tunnustatte hnen nerollisuutensa. Sitten meidn tytyy koettaa
saada hnet juutalaisen ksist. Hn on sitoutunut hnelle kolmeksi
vuodeksi -- vhintin kahdeksi vuodeksi ja kahdeksaksi kuukaudeksi --
tst ajasta eteenpin. Tietysti minun tytyy maksaa miehelle jotakin.
Kun kaikki tuo on jrjestetty, niin min hankin jonkun teatterin West
Endiss, ja annan hnen esiinty kunnollisessa ympristss. Hn
ihastuttaa viel maailman yht paljon kuin jo minutkin."

"Se on mahdotonta, hyv ystv."

"Se onnistuu varmaan. Hnell ei ole yksin kyky, tydellist
taiteilija-vaistoa, vaan myskin personallisuutta. Ja sin olet usein
sanonut minulle, etteivt mielipiteet pane maailmaa liikkeelle, vaan
personallisuudet."

"No niin, milloin me menemme?"

"Odotahan. Tnn on tiistai. Mrtkmme huomisilta. Huomenna hn
esiintyy Juliana".

"Hyv on. Tavataan Bristolissa kello kahdeksan. Min annan sanaa
Basilille."

"Ei kello kahdeksan, Harry. Puoliseitsemlt. Meidn tytyy olla siell
ennen nytnnn alkua. Teidn tytyy nhd hnet ensi nytksess, jossa
hn kohtaa Romeon."

"Puoliseitsemn! Millaiseen aikaan! Aivan kuin sisi lihalient tai
lukisi englantilaista romaania. Vasta seitsemlt. Ei kukaan gentleman
sy pivllist ennen seitsem. Tapaatko sin Basilia sit ennen? Vai
kirjoitanko min hnelle?"

"Tuo hyv Basil! En ole nhnyt hnt kokonaiseen viikkoon. Se on julmaa
minun puoleltani, sill hn lhetti minulle muotokuvani erinomaisen
kauniissa puitteissa, joihin hn itse oli tehnyt piirustuksen, ja vaikka
kadehdinkin kuvaa hiukan sen vuoksi ett se on minua kuukautta nuorempi,
niin minun tytyy tunnustaa, ett olen hyvin ihastunut siihen. Ehk sin
mielemmin kirjoitat Basilille. Min en tahtoisi tavata hnt yksin. Hn
sanoo minulle aina ikvi asioita. Hn antaa minulle aina hyvi
neuvoja."

Lordi Henry hymyili. "Ihmiset antavat mielelln toisille sit mit he
itse tarvitsisivat. Sit min nimitn anteliaisuuden huipuksi."

"Oi, Basil on paras ihminen maailmassa, mutta hn on hiukan
poroporvarillinen. Sen min olen huomannut sen jlkeen kuin tutustuin
sinuun, Harry."

"Basil, rakas ystv, panee taiteesensa kaiken sen mik on jaloa
hness. Siit seuraa, ettei hnelt elmn varalle j muuta kuin omat
ennakkoluulonsa, mielipiteens ja terve jrkens. Kaikki taiteilijat,
jotka luonteeltaan ovat miellyttvi, ovat huonoja taiteilijoita. Hyvt
taiteilijat elvt vain teoksissansa ja sen vuoksi ovat he luonteeltaan
ikvi. Suuri runoilija, todellisesti suuri runoilija, on kaikkein
eprunollisin kaikista elvist olennoista. Mutta huonot runoilijat ovat
suorastaan ihastuttavia. Mit huonommat heidn loppusointunsa ovat, sit
kauniimmat he ovat katsella. Vain se seikka, ett on julkaissut kehnoja
sonetteja, tekee miehen vastustamattomaksi. Hn el itse sit runoutta,
jota hn ei osaa kirjoittaa. Toiset kirjoittavat runoutta, jota he eivt
uskalla toteuttaa."

"Min epilen, tokko tuo todellakin pit paikkansa, Harry?" sanoi
Dorian Gray pirskoittaen nenliinaansa hajuvett suuresta
kultakorkkisesta pullosta, joka seisoi pydll. "Se on kai totta, koska
sin sen sanot. Ja nyt minun tytyy lhte. Imogen odottaa minua. l
unohda huomista piv. Hyvsti."

Kun hn poistui huoneesta, niin lordi Henryn silmluomet painuivat
kiinni ja hn alkoi ajatella. Harva ihminen oli herttnyt hnen
mielenkiintoaan samassa mrin kuin Dorian Gray, ja kuitenkaan ei
nuorukaisen silmitn ihastus johonkin toiseen olentoon herttnyt
hness vhintkn kateutta tai ikvyyden tunnetta. Se hnt vain
huvitti. Se teki Dorianin luonteen tutkimisen vain sit
mieltkiinnittvmmksi. Luonnontieteelliset kokeet olivat aina
huvittaneet hnt enemmn kuin niiden tulokset, jotka tuntuivat hnest
ikvilt ja arvottomilta. Ja niinp hn oli alkanut ensin tutkia
itsens ja sitten toisia. Inhimillinen elm -- se yksin hnen
mielestn kannatti tutkimista. Siihen verrattuna ei mikn muu ollut
minkn arvoista. Kun tutkii elmn valinkattilaa, jossa surut ja ilot
sekaantuvat toisiinsa, niin eip totta tosiaankaan voi pit
lasinaamaria silmilln tai pysytell loitolla rikkihyryist, jotka
julmilla haaveilla ja kieroilla unilla saattavat aivot sekaviksi, ja
mielikuvituksen sairaaksi. Oli olemassa niin hienoja myrkkyj, ettei
voinut pst niiden ominaisuuksien perille muulla tavalla kuin itse
nauttimalla niit. Oli niin ihmeellisi tauteja, ett vain potemalla
itse niit saattoi oppia ymmrtmn niiden luonnetta. Mutta palkinto
olikin sitten sit suurempi! Kuinka ihmeelliseksi koko maailma silloin
vasta muuttui! Mik nautinto tehd huomioita himojen kovasta
johdonmukaisuudesta ja neron vrivivahteisesta elmst -- huomata,
milloin ne yhtyivt ja milloin ne erosivat, miss kohdassa ne olivat
sopusoinnussa ja miss sorahtelivat. Mitp vli hinnasta! Tunteista ei
voinut koskaan maksaa liian korkeaa hintaa.

Hn tiesi varmasti -- ja tuo ajatus nosti ilon vlkkeen hnen ruskeihin
agaattisilmiins -- ett hnen sanansa, muutamat musikaaliset sanat,
jotka hn oli lausunut musikaalisessa svyss, olivat johdattaneet
Dorian Grayn sielun tuon valkean tytn luo, jota hn kunnioittaen
jumaloi. Tavallaan nuorukainen oli hnen luomansa. Hn oli saattanut
hnet ennenaikuiseen kypsyyteen. Se oli jo jotakin. Tavalliset ihmiset
odottivat kunnes elm paljasti heille salaisuutensa, mutta muutamille
valituille elmn ihmeet ilmestyvt jo ennenkuin harso oli
syrjytettykn. Tavallisesti taide sen vaikutti, ja varsinkin se laji
kirjallisuutta, joka suorastaan koskettelee himoja ja jrke. Mutta
joskus rikas personallisuus saattoi tytt taiteen paikan ja tehtvn,
ja luoda silloin tavallansa todellisen taideteoksen; sill elmkin luo
etevi taideteoksia aivan kuin runouskin, kuvanveisto- tai maalaustaide.

Niin, nuorukainen oli ennenaikuisesti kypsynyt. Hn korjasi viljan jo
kevll. Hness oli nuorukaisen voimaa ja himoa, mutta samalla mys
miehen itsetietoisuutta. Mik nautinto seurata hnen kehitystn. Hnen
kauniit kasvonsa ja kaunis sielunsa herttivt ihastusta. Mit sill
vli miten kaikki pttyisi. Hn oli tuollainen viehke olento jossakin
juhlasaatossa tai nytelmss, jonka ilo tuntuu meist vieraalta, mutta
jonka suru kiihoittaa meidn kauneusaistiamme ja jonka haavat ovat kuin
punertavia ruusuja.

Sielu ja ruumis, ruumis ja sielu -- miten salaperisi ne olivat!
Sielussa oli jotakin elimellist ja ruumiilla oli sielukkaat hetkens.
Aistit saattoivat hienostua ja jrki alentua. Kukapa voi sanoa, miss
lihalliset halut loppuivat ja henkiset alkoivat? Miten pintapuolisia
olivat tavallisten sielutieteilijiden omavaltaiset mritelmt! Ja
miten vaikeata ratkaista eri koulujen ksitysten vlill! Oliko sielu
varjo, joka eleli synnin majassa? Vai elik ruumis sielussa, niinkuin
Giordano Bruno oletti? Hengen eroaminen aineesta oli salaperisyys,
samoinkuin hengen yhtyminenkin aineesen.

Hn rupesi ajattelemaan voisiko sielutiede koskaan kehitty niin
tydelliseksi tieteeksi, ett se voisi selvitt elmn pienimmnkin
lhteen. Nyt me aina ymmrsimme vrin itsemme ja vain harvoin
ymmrsimme toisia. Kokemuksella ei ollut mitn eetillist arvoa.
Ihmiset antoivat vain tuollaisen nimen omille erehdyksilleen.
Moralistien mielest kokemus tavallisesti oli vain jonkunmoinen
varoitus, jolla oli eetillinen voima luonteen kehittmisess, joka
opetti meille mit meidn tuli seurata ja mit vltt. Mutta
kokemuksella ei ollut mitn kyttvoimaa. Sill oli yht vhn
itsetoimivaa vaikutusta kuin omallatunnollakaan. Se todisti meille vain,
ett meidn tulevaisuutemme tulisi olemaan kerrassaan samanlainen kuin
menneisyytemmekin, ja ett me yh uudestaan, vielp kevyellkin
mielell, vajoisimme niihin samoihin synteihin, joihin me ennen olimme
tehneet itsemme syypiksi, ja joita tehdessmme me olimme tunteneet
inhoa.

Hn oli aivan selvill siit, ett vain kokeellisen jrjestelmn kautta
voisi tieteellisesti analyserata himoja; ja Dorian Gray oli iknkuin
varta vasten luotu hnen kokeiluesineeksens, joka nytti lupaavan
runsaita ja hedelmllisi tuloksia. Hnen killinen, kiihke rakkautensa
Sibyl Vanea kohtaan oli varsin mieltkiinnittv sielullinen ilmi.
Epilemtt uteliaisuudella oli mys osansa siin, uteliaisuudella ja
halulla saada kokea jotakin uutta. Mutta se ei ollut mikn
yksinkertainen, vaan pikemmin hyvin monimutkainen intohimo. Nuoruuden
puhtaasti aistillinen vaisto oli mielikuvituksen vlityksell kehittynyt
ja muuttunut tunteeksi, joka nuorukaisen omasta mielest oli kokonaan
aistillisuudesta vapaata ja sen vuoksi juuri sit vaarallisempi. Se oli
noita intohimoja, joiden alkupern suhteen me niin helposti erehdymme ja
jotka meit sit enemmn sortavat. Heikommat vaikutteet ovat ne, joiden
luonteen me tunnemme. Sattuu useasti kun me luulemme tekevmme kokeita
toisilla ihmisill, ett me itse asiassa kokeilemmekin itsellmme.

Lordi Henryn ollessa niss mietteissns kuului ovelta kolkutus ja
palvelija astui sisn muistuttaen hnelle ett oli jo aika pukeutua
pivllisille. Hn nousi yls ja katsoi ulos kadulle. Laskevan auringon
steet kuvastuivat punoittavan kultaisina vastakkaisen talon ikkunoissa.
Ruudut hohtivat kuin tulikuumat metallilevyt. Taivas oli vriltn kuin
lakastunut ruusu. Hn ajatteli nuoren ystvns vririkasta elm ja
ihmetteli mitenk se vihdoin pttyisi.

Kun hn palasi kotiin kello puoliyhden tienoissa, niin hn nki
shksanoman eteisen pydll. Hn avasi sen, se oli Dorian Graylt.
Tm ilmoitti olevansa kihloissa Sibyl Vanen kanssa.




LUKU V.


"iti, iti, min olen niin onnellinen!" kuiskasi tytt piiloittaen
kasvonsa kuihtuneen, vshtneen naisen syliin, joka istui
yksinkertaisen huoneen ainoassa nojatuolissa selin hikisev valoa
kohti. "Min olen niin onnellinen!" hn toisti, "ja sinunkin pit olla
onnellinen!"

Mrs. Vane stkhti ja laski laihan, valkean ktens tyttrens pn
plle. "Onnellinen!" hn sanoi, "min olen vain onnellinen silloin kuin
nen sinun nyttelevn. Mr. Isaacs on ollut kovin hyv meille ja me
olemme hnelle velassa."

Tytt katsoi nyreissn yls. "Rahaako, iti?" hn sanoi, "mit raha
meit liikuttaa? Rakkaus on paljon trkemp kuin raha."

"Mr. Isaacs on antanut meille edeltpin viisikymment puntaa
voidaksemme maksaa velkamme ja varustaa kunnollisesti Jamesia. l sit
unohda, Sibyl. Viisikymment puntaa on suuri summa. Mr. Isaacs on ollut
erittin ystvllinen."

"Ei hn ole mikn gentleman, iti, ja min en voi krsi sit tapaa,
mill hn minua puhuttelee", sanoi tytt nousten pystyyn ja astuen
ikkunan luo.

"En ymmrr, miten me tulisimme toimeen ilman hnt", vastasi
vanhanpuoleinen nainen valittaen.

Sibyl Vane heitteli ptn ja nauroi. "Me emme tarvitse hnt en,
iti. Satuprinssi pit nyt huolta meist." Sitten hn vaikeni. Veri
kohosi hnen poskipihins. Kiihke hengitys kulki hnen avonaisten
huuliensa yli ja saattoi ne vapisemaan. Etelmainen intohimon tuulahdus
lehahti hnen lvitsens ja sai hnen pukunsa hienot laskokset
vrhtmn. "Min rakastan hnt", sanoi hn yksinkertaisesti.

"Hullu lapsi! Hullu lapsi!" kuului papukaijamainen vastaus. Ja vrill
hohtokivill koristettujen, koukkuisten sormien liikkeet tekivt
vastauksen luonnottoman kummalliseksi.

Tytt nauroi jlleen. Hnen nessn oli hkkilinnun iloa. Tuo svel
kuvastui hnen silmissn kirkkaana loisteena. Sitten hn sulki hetkeksi
silmns, iknkuin salatakseen salaisuuttaan. Kun ne avautuivat
jlleen, olivat ne unelman harson peitossa.

Ohuthuulinen viisaus puhui hnelle kuluneesta tuolista, neuvoi
varovaisuutta ja saneli hnelle otteita pelkuruuden kirjasta, jonka
tekij on omistanut itselleen terveen jrjen nimen. Tytt ei kuunnellut.
Hn oli vapaa intohimonsa vankilassa. Hnen prinssins, satuprinssi, oli
hnen mukanansa. Ajatuksissaan hn oli kutsunut hnet luokseen. Hn oli
lhettnyt sielunsa hnt etsimn ja se oli tuonut hnet takaisin.
Hnen suutelonsa poltti jlleen tytn huulilla ja hnen lmmin
hengityksens tuntui hnen silmluomillansa. Sitten viisaus muutti
suunnitelmansa ja puhui tiedusteluista ja selonotoista. Ehkp tuo nuori
mies oli rikas. Siin tapauksessa saattoi naimista ajatella. Sibyl kuuli
korvissaan aineellisten etujen aaltojen kuohua. Oveluuden nuolet
thtytyivt hneen. Hn nki ohuitten huulten liikkuvan ja hn hymyili.

kki hn tunsi tarpeen puhua. Tuo monisanainen hiljaisuus hiritsi
hnt. "iti, iti", hn huudahti, "miksi hn rakastaa minua niin
suuresti? Min tiedn miksi min hnt rakastan. Rakastan hnt siksi,
ett hn on aivan kuin rakkaus itse. Vaan mit hn nkee minussa? En ole
hnen arvoisensa. Ja kuitenkin -- en tied miksi -- vaikka tiednkin
olevani niin paljon huonompi hnt, niin en tunne nyryytt. Olen ylpe,
rettmn ylpe. iti, rakastitko sin is samalla tavalla kuin min
satuprinssi?"

Vanhanpuoleisen naisen posket kalpenivat ihomaalin alla ja hnen kuivat
huulensa vrhtelivt tuskasta. Sibyl hykksi hnen luokseen, kiersi
ksivarret hnen kaulaansa ja suuteli hnt. "Anna anteeksi, iti.
Tiedn ettet mielellsi puhu isst. Mutta se tuottaa sinulle tuskaa
vain siksi, ett rakastit hnt niin paljon. l nyt noin
surulliselta. Min olen yht onnellinen tnn kuin sin kaksikymment
vuotta sitten. Ah, anna minun olla aina onnellinen!"

"Lapseni, sin olet aivan liian nuori ajatellaksesi rakkautta. Sit
paitsi, mit sin tiedt tuosta nuoresta miehest? Et tunne edes hnen
nimens. Koko juttu tulee kovin sopimattomaan aikaan, juuri kun James
lhtee Australiaan ja minulla on niin paljon puuhaa, sinun olisi
todellakin pitnyt olla hiukan hienotunteisempi. Mutta, niinkuin jo
sanoin, jos hn on rikas..."

"Oi, iti, iti, anna minun olla onnellinen!"

Mrs. Vane silmsi hneen ja painoi hnet rintaansa vasten tuollaisella
teeskennellyll teatterimaisella liikkeell, joka niin helposti voi
tulla nyttelijn toiseksi luonnoksi. Samassa ovi avautui ja nuori
ruskeatukkainen poika tuli huoneesen. Ruumiiltaan hn oli
lihavanpuoleinen, hnen ktens ja jalkansa olivat kovin suuria ja hnen
liikkeens kmpelit. Hn ei ollut yht hienotekoinen kuin hnen
sisarensa. Tuskinpa olisi voinut uskoakkaan, ett heidn vlilln oli
olemassa niin lheist sukulaisuussidett. Mrs. Vane katsoi poikaansa ja
lissi hymyilyns. Ajatuksissaan hn kohotti poikansa yleisksi, ja hn
oli varma siit, ett _kuvaelma_ oli varsin onnistunut.

"Voisit sst muutamia suudelmia minullekin, Sibyl", sanoi poika
hyvntahtoisesti.

"Mutta sinhn et pid suuteloista, Jim", hn huudahti. "Sin olet
hirve vanha karhu." Ja hn juoksi huoneen poikki syleilemn veljen.

James Vane katsoi hellsti sisareensa. "Tule minun kanssani ulos
kvelemn, Sibyl. Min en suinkaan en koskaan ne tt julmaa
Lontoota. Min olen varma, ettei minun tarvitse sit nhd."

"Poikani, l puhu noin julmasti", mutisi mrs. Vane ja otti huoaten
kteens kimaltelevan teatteripuvun ja alkoi paikata sit. Hn oli
hiukan pahoillaan siit, ettei poika ollut yhtynyt heidn somaan
ryhmns. Hn olisi lisnnyt kohtauksen nyttmllist vaikutusta.

"Miksik en, iti? Min tarkoitan tytt totta."

"Sin vaivaat minua, poikani. Min luotan varmasti, ett palaat kotiin
Australiasta hyviss varoissa. En usko ett siirtomaissa on
minknlaista seurapiiri, ei ainakaan mitn, mit min seurapiiriksi
nimittisin. Ja sen vuoksi ansaittuasi itsellesi omaisuuden, sinun pit
tulla takaisin ja asettua Lontoosen."

"Seurapiiri!" mutisi poika. "En min siit yhtn vlit. Min tahtoisin
ansaita rahaa, jotta sin ja Sibyl voisitte jtt teatterin. Min
vihaan teatteria."

"Oi, Jim!" sanoi Sibyl nauraen, "kuinka pahasti sin puhut! Mutta
tahdotko todellakin lhte minun kanssani kvelemn? Sep olisi
hauskaa! Min pelksin, ett menisit sanomaan jhyvisi jollekin
ystvllesi -- joko Tom Hardylle, joka antoi sinulle tuon hirven
piipun, tai Ned Langtonille, joka pilkkaa sinua sen vuoksi ett poltat
sit. Sin olet kovin herttainen, kun uhraat minulle viimeisen
iltapuolesi. Minnek me menemme? Lhdetn Hyde Parkiin."

"Min olen liian huonosti puettu", vastasi poika rypisten kulmiaan.
"Ainoastaan hieno maailma menee sinne."

"Tyhmyyksi, Jim", kuiskasi tytt silitellen hnen takkinsa hihaa.

Hn epri hetken aikaa. "Olkoon menneeksi", sanoi hn vihdoin, "mutta
l pukeudu kovin vitkalleen."

Tytt hyppi ulos huoneesta. Hn juoksi laulaen yls portaita. Hnen
pienten jalkojensa sipsutus kuului ylhlt.

James kulki pari kolme kertaa yli huoneen lattian. Sitten hn kntyi
idin puoleen, joka istui neti tuolillaan. "iti, ovatko minun
tavarani kunnossa?" hn kysyi.

"Ovat kyll, James", hn vastasi silmt tyhn kiintynein. Viime
kuukausien kuluessa hnen mieltns ahdisti joka kerta, kun hn ji
yksin tuon jykevn, vakavan poikansa kanssa. Pojan katse teki hnen
pintapuolisen, viekkaan luonteensa epvarmaksi. Hn pelksi ett poika
epili jotakin. Hnen nettmyytens, sill hn ei tehnyt minknlaisia
huomautuksia, oli kerrassaan sietmtnt. Hn alkoi valittaa. Naiset
puolustavat itsen hykkmll toisten kimppuun, samoinkuin he
htyyttvt toisia myntymll aivan kki ja odottamatta. "Min toivon,
ett tulet olemaan tyytyvinen merimieselmsi, James", hn sanoi.
"Pid mielesssi, ett itse olet valinnut sen uran. Olisit voinut pst
asianajokonttoriin. Asianajajia pidetn suuressa arvossa ja maaseudulla
parhaimmat perheet lhettvt heille pivlliskutsuja."

"Min vihaan konttorityt ja min vihaan kirjureita", vastasi poika.
"Mutta sin olet aivan oikeassa. Olen itse valinnut elmnurani. En
sanokkaan mitn muuta, kuin pid huolta Sibylist. l anna hnen
vahingoittua. iti, sinun tytyy pit huolta hnest."

"James, kyllp sin kytt kummaa kielt. Tietysti min pidn Sibylist
huolta."

"Olen kuullut, ett ers herra ky joka ilta teatterissa ja puhuttelee
hnt nyttmll. Onko se hyv? Mit sin siihen sanot?"

"Sin puhut asioista, joita et ymmrr, James. Meidn ammatissamme me
olemme tottuneet vastaanottamaan koko lailla mieluista huomiota. Minkin
yhteen aikaan sain paljon kukkia. Se oli siihen aikaan, jolloin
nyttelemiseen pantiin todellista arvoa. Mit Sibyliin tulee niin en
tied onko hnen tunteensa vakava vai ei. Mutta siit ei ole
epilystkn, ettei tuo nuori herra olisi oikea gentleman. Hn kohtelee
minua mit suurimmalla huomaavaisuudella. Sit paitsi hn nytt olevan
rikas ja hnen kukkansa ovat suloisia."

"Sin et tied edes hnen nimens", sanoi poika tuimasti.

"En", vastasi iti levollisesti. "Hn ei ole viel ilmoittanut oikeaa
nimen. Minun mielestni se on hyvin romantillista. Hn on varmaan
aatelismies."

James Vane puri huuliaan. "Pid Sibyli silmll, iti", hn huudahti,
"pid hnt silmll."

"Poikani, sin pahoitat suuresti mieltni. Min pidn Sibyli aina
silmll. Tietysti, jos tuo herra on rikas, niin ei ole mitn syyt
vastustaa avioliittoa hnen kanssansa. Min luulen varmaan, ett hn on
aatelismies. Hn tekee aivan sen vaikutuksen, sen voin vakuuttaa. Siit
voi tulla kerrassaan loistava avioliitto Sibylille. Kuinka kaunis pari
se olisi. Hn on todellakin harvinaisen kaunis. Kaikki sen huomaavat."

Poika mutisi jotain itseksens ja rummutti ikkunaruutua kmpelin
sormin. Hn knnhti juuri ympri sanoaksensa jotakin, kun ovi avautui
ja Sibyl tuli sisn.

"Miten vakavilta te molemmat nyttte!" huudahti hn. "Mik siihen on
syyn?"

"Ei mikn", vastasi James. "Pithn ihmisen joskus olla vakavakin.
Hyvsti, iti. Tahtoisin saada pivllist kello viidelt. Kaikki muu on
pakattuna, paitsi paitani, jotta voit olla aivan huoleton."

"Hyvsti, poikani", vastasi iti kumartaen hiukan kopeasti.

Hnt suututti se tapa, mill James oli ruvennut hnt puhuttelemaan ja
pojan katseessa oli mys jotakin, joka peloitti hnt.

"Suutele minua, iti", sanoi tytt. Hnen kukkamaiset huulensa
koskettivat kuihtunutta poskea ja sulattivat niiden jn.

"Lapseni, lapseni!" huudahti mrs. Vane katsoen kattoa kohti iknkuin
etsien olematonta parvea.

"Tule, Sibyl", sanoi veli krsimttmsti. Hn vihasi itins
teeskentely.

He lksivt ulos ihanaan, kimmeltelevn auringonpaisteesen ja kulkivat
pitkin autiota Euston roadia. Ohikulkijat katsoivat ihmeissn
synkkmielist, vakavaa nuorukaista, joka kulki karheissa, huonoissa
vaatteissaan kauniin, hienon tytn seurassa. Hn nytti yksinkertaiselta
puutarhurilta ruusun rinnalla. Jim rypisti kulmakarvojaan joka kerta,
kun hn kohtasi jonkun vieraan uteliaan katseen. Huomatessaan
herttvns huomiota hn tunsi tuota vastenmielisyytt, joka valtaa
neron vasta myhn elmss, mutta josta ei koskaan tavallinen ihminen
voi vapautua. Mutta Sibyl oli aivan tiedoton siit huomiosta, jota hn
hertti. Hnen rakkautensa vrhteli hnen huuliensa hymyilyss. Hn
ajatteli satuprinssi, ja jotta hn voisi oikein rauhassa ajatella
hnt, hn puhui vain laivasta, jossa Jimin oli mr purjehtia,
kullasta, jota hn tll matkallaan lytisi, ja siit ihmeellisest
rikkaasta neitosesta, jonka hn pelastaisi ilkeitten, punapaitaisten
rosvojen ksist. Sill Jim ei jisi merimieheksi koko iksens. Kaikkea
viel! Merimiehen elm oli hirve. Olla vankina ilkess laivassa kun
suuret, kyhmyniskaiset aallot yrittisivt tunkeutua sisn ja musta
myrsky kaataisi mastot ja repisi purjeet pitkiksi, vinkuviksi
riekaleiksi! Hnen pitisi lhte laivasta Melbournessa, ottaa
ystvlliset jhyviset kapteenilta ja menn suoraa tiet kultamaille.
Viikon kuluttua hn lytisi suuren kultamhkleen, suurimman mit
koskaan on nhty ja toisi sen rannikolle vaunuissa, joita kuusi
ratsastavaa polisia vartioisi. Rosvot hykkisivt kolme kertaa heidn
kimppuunsa, mutta he karkoittaisivat ne joka kerta ja tappaisivat
useita. Tai ei -- hn ei menisikn kultamaille. Siell oli julmia
paikkoja, jossa ihmiset juopuivat, ampuivat toisiaan kapakoissa ja
kyttivt rumaa kielt. Hnest tulisi kelpo maanviljelij, jolla olisi
paljon lampaita, ja jonakin iltana ratsastaessaan kotiin hn nkisi tuon
kauniin, rikkaan tytn rosvojen ksiss, mustan hevosen selss, ja hn
ajaisi heit takaa ja pelastaisi tytn. Tietysti tytt rakastuisi hneen
ja hn tyttn, ja he menisivt naimisiin, palaisivat kotiin ja
asuisivat suuressa talossa Lontoossa. Niin, paljon ihanaa hn saisi
kokea! Mutta hnen pitisi olla hyvin hyv, ei kadottaa rohkeuttansa
eik kuluttaa turhaan rahojaan. Sibyl oli hnt vain vuotta vanhempi,
mutta hn tunsi elm paljoa paremmin kuin hn. Joka postissa hnen
piti mys kirjoittaa hnelle ja lukea iltarukouksensa joka ilta ennen
maatapanoa. Jumala oli hyv ja oli varjeleva hnt. Sibyl tahtoi mys
rukoilla hnen puolestansa, ja muutaman vuoden kuluttua hn palaisi
kotiin rikkaana ja onnellisena.

Poika kuunteli apealla mielell hnen puhettaan eik vastannut mitn.
Kotoalht tuntui niin tuskalliselta.

Mutta eip se yksin tehnyt hnen mieltns synkksi ja raskaaksi. Vaikka
hn olikin hyvin kokematon, niin hn sittenkin tunsi selvsti, ett joku
vaara uhkasi Sibyli. Tuolla nuorella herralla, joka oli rakastunut
hneen, ei voinut olla hyv tarkoitus. Hn oli hieno herrasmies ja sen
vuoksi Jim vihasi hnt, tunsi tuota merkillist styvihaa hnt
kohtaan, jota hn ei voinut tarkemmin selitt, ja joka sen vuoksi oli
sit voimakkaampi hness. Hn tiesi mys, miten pintapuolinen ja
turhamainen hnen itins luonteeltaan oli ja aavisti, ett nuo
ominaisuudet voisivat vied perikatoon Sibylin ja hnen onnensa. Lapset
alkavat rakastamalla vanhempiansa; kun he tulevat suuremmiksi, niin he
tuomitsevat heit; joskus he antavat heille anteeksi.

Hnen itins! Hn oli aikonut kysy hnelt jotakin, jotakin jota hn
kuukausimri oli mielessn hautonut. Satunnainen lause, jonka hn oli
kuullut teatterissa, pilkallinen kuiskaus, joka ern iltana oli osunut
hnen korvaansa odottaessaan nyttmovella, oli herttnyt hness
suuren joukon kauheita ajatuksia. Hnen mieleens oli jnyt muisto
noista sanoista iknkuin piiskaniskusta, jonka hn olisi saanut vasten
kasvoja. Hnen kulmakarvansa rypistyivt kokoon syvksi vaoksi ja hn
puri huultaan tuskan vallassa.

"Sin et kuuntele mitn mit min sinulle sanon, Jim", sanoi Sibyl, "ja
min suunnittelen niin paljon kaunista sinun tulevaisuutesi varalta.
Sano nyt jotakin."

"Mit sin tahdot, ett min sanoisin?"

"Ett tahdot olla hyv poika, etk unohda meit", hn vastasi hymyillen.

Hn kohautti olkapitn. "Ennemmin sin unohdat minut kuin min sinut,
Sibyl."

Sibyl punastui. "Mit sin tarkoitat, Jim", hn kysyi.

"Sinulla on uusi ystv, olen kuullut. Kuka hn on? Miksi et ole puhunut
hnest minulle? Hn ei tarkoita sinulle mitn hyv."

"Ole vaiti, Jim!" Sibyl huudahti. "l sano mitn hnt vastaan. Min
rakastan hnt."

"Mutta ethn sin edes tunne hnen nimens", vastasi poika. "Kuka hn
on? Minulla on oikeus saada tiet sit."

"Hnen nimens on satuprinssi. Eik se ole kaunis nimi. Voi, sinua pahaa
poikaa! Sin et sit koskaan unohtaisi. Jos vain nkisit hnet, niin hn
olisi sinun mielestsi kaikkein suloisin ihminen koko maailmassa. Joskus
sin tapaat hnet. Sitten kun palaat takaisin Australiasta. Sin pidt
hnest sitten hyvin paljon. Kaikki pitvt hnest ja min ... rakastan
hnt. Jospa voisit tulla teatteriin tn iltana. Hn tulee sinne, ja
min nyttelen Juliaa. Oi! kuinka min sit nyttelen! Ajatteles, Jim,
olla rakastunut ja nytell Juliaa! Nhd hnet katsomolla! Nytell
hnen iloksensa! Min pelkn pelstyttvni koko seurueen,
pelstyttvni tahi lumoavani heidt. Kun on rakastunut, niin silloin
voittaa oman itsenskin. Tuo hirve mr. Isaacs raukka huutaa varmaan
kapakkatovereilleen: hn on nero! Hn on jo saarnannut minusta kuin
uskonkappaleesta, tn iltana hn julistaa minut ilmestykseksi. Min
tunnen sen. Ja siihen on syyn vain hn, hn yksin, satuprinssi, minun
ihmeellinen rakastajani, minun armias jumalani. Min olen kyh hnen
rinnallansa. Kyhk? Mutta mit se haittaa? Kun kyhyys rymii ovesta
sisn, niin rakkaus lent ikkunasta ulos. Meidn sananlaskumme
olisivat muutettavat. Ne ovat talven aikana keksityt, ja nyt on kes.
Minulle kevn aika; kukkasten tanssia sinipilviss."

"Hn on hieno herra", sanoi poika synksti.

"Prinssi!" huudahti tytt sointuvalla nell. "Mit muuta sin vaadit?"

"Hn tahtoo tehd sinut orjakseen."

"Min kammon vapautta."

"Min tahtoisin suojella sinua hnelt."

"Kun nkee hnet, niin jumaloipi hnt, kun tuntee hnet, niin luottaa
hneen."

"Sibyl, sin olet mieletn."

Tytt nauroi ja tarttui hnen ksivarteensa. "Sin vanha, rakas Jim,
sin puhut kuin olisit sadan vuoden vanha. Kerran sinkin rakastut.
Silloin sin ymmrrt mit se on. l nyt noin synklt. Pitisihn
sinun olla iloinen ajatellessasi, ett vaikka lhdet pois, niin jtt
minut onnellisempana kuin mit koskaan ennen olen ollut. Elm on ollut
kova meille kummallekin, rettmn kova ja vaikea. Mutta nyt se
muuttuu. Sin lhdet uuteen maailmaan ja min olen jo uuden lytnyt.
Tss on kaksi tuolia; istutaan thn ja katsellaan hienoja ihmisi,
jotka kulkevat tst ohi."

He kvivt istumaan katselijajoukon keskelle. Tulpaanit loistivat
penkereissn tien toisella puolella kuin tuliliekit. Valkea tomu
vaappui iknkuin kurjenmiekan vrjv ply kuumassa ilmassa.
Monivriset pivnvarjot keinuivat ja liehuivat edes-takaisin kuin
jttilisperhot.

Sibyl sai veljen puhumaan itsestn, omista toiveistaan ja aikeistaan.
Hn puhui hitaasti ja vaivalla. He vaihtoivat sanoja keskenn kuin
nyttelijt replikejn. Sibyl oli alakuloinen. Hn ei voinut tartuttaa
toiseen iloaan. Hn ei voinut hertt hness muuta vastakaikua kuin
hienon hymyn, joka karehteli hnen tyytymttmiss suupielissn. Hetken
kuluttua hn vaikeni. Mutta kki hn nki vilahdukselta kultaiset
hiukset ja hymyilevt huulet ja Dorian Gray ajoi heidn ohitsensa kahden
naisen seurassa avonaisissa vaunuissa.

Sibyl hyphti pystyyn. "Tuossa hn on!" huudahti hn.

"Kuka?" kysyi Jim Vane.

"Satuprinssi", vastasi tytt katsoen vaunujen jlkeen.

Jim hyppsi pystyyn ja tarttui lujasti tytn ksivarteen. "Nyt hnet
minulle. Miss hn on? Osoita hnet minulle. Minun tytyy saada nhd
hnet!" huudahti poika. Mutta samassa Berwickin herttuan nelivaljakko
kiiti ohi, ja kun nkala oli jlleen vapaa, niin vaunut olivat jo
kadonneet puistosta.

"Hn meni jo", mutisi Sibyl suruissaan. "Min olisin tahtonut nytt
hnet sinulle."

"Minkin olisin tahtonut nhd hnet, sill niin totta kuin Jumala on
taivaassa, jos hn tekee sinulle jotain pahaa, niin min tapan hnet."

Sibyl katsoi kauhuissaan veljeens. Poika toisti sanansa. Ne viilsivt
ilmaa kuin tikarit. Ihmiset ymprill alkoivat tarkastella heit. Ers
nainen heidn vieressn tirskui.

"Tule pois, Jim, tule", kuiskasi Sibyl. Poika seurasi hnt aivan
koneellisesti joukon lpi. Hn iloitsi itse omista sanoistaan.

Kun he tulivat Akilleen patsaan kohdalle kntyi Sibyl taakseen. Slin
ilme hnen silmissn muuttui hymyilyksi huulilla. Hn pudisti ptn
veljelleen. "Sin olet hullu, Jim, aivan hullu. Ilke poika sin olet.
Kuinka voit puhua noin kauheita asioita? Sin et tied mit sanot. Sin
olet vain mustasukkainen ja ilke. Oi, min toivoisin ett sinkin
rakastuisit. Rakkaus tekee ihmiset hyviksi ja se mit sin sanoit oli
ilke."

"Min olen kuudentoista vanha", vastasi poika, "ja min tiedn, mit
min tahdon. idist sinulla ei ole apua. Hn ei ymmrr pit sinusta
huolta. Min en tahtoisikaan nyt lhte Australiaan. Halusta jttisin
koko matkan. Ja sen tekisinkin, jolleivt tavarani jo olisi
sisnkirjoitetut."

"Oi, l ole noin vakava, Jim. Sin olet aivan kuin joku sankari noissa
tyhmiss melodraamoissa, joissa iti niin mielelln esiintyi. En min
huoli riidell sinun kanssasi. Min nin hnet ja sekin on jo suuri
onni. Ei huolita riidell. Min tiedn ettet koskaan tekisi pahaa
kenellekn, jota min rakastan, eik totta?"

"En niinkauan kuin sin rakastat hnt", vastasi poika apeasti.

"Min rakastan hnt aina!" huudahti Sibyl.

"Ent hn?"

"Hnkin rakastaa aina!"

"Se onkin hnelle parasta."

Sibyl stkhti. Sitten hn purskahti nauruun ja tarttui veljens
ksivarteen. Olihan hn vain poika.

Marble Archin luota he nousivat omnibussiin, jolla he psivt aina
kotiinsa saakka Euston roadille. Kello oli jo yli viiden, ja Sibylin
piti levt pari tuntia ennen esiintymist. Jim sit halusi. Hn tahtoi
sanoa hnelle jhyviset idin poissaollessa. Sill iti varmaan tekisi
siit koko kohtauksen, ja hn puolestaan vihasi kaikkea teeskentely.

He sanoivat jhyviset Sibylin omassa huoneessa. Mustasukkaisuus
raivosi pojan sydmess, sek voimakas, hirvittv viha muukalaista
kohtaan, joka hnen mielestn oli tunkeutunut heidn vliins. Mutta
kun Sibyl kiersi ksivartensa hnen kaulaansa, ja sormillaan silitti
hnen karheaa tukkaansa, niin hn pehmeni ja suuteli hnt todellisella
hellyydell. Hnen silmns olivat kyyneliss kun hn astui portaita
alas.

iti odotti hnt alhaalla. Hn torui hnt eptsmllisyydest hnen
astuessaan sisn. Poika ei vastannut mitn, vaan kvi yksinkertaisen
aterian reen. Krpset surisivat pydn ymprill, ja rymivt
tahraisella liinalla. Keskell omnibussien melua ja ajoneuvojen rtin
hn kuuli narisevan nen, joka riisti hnelt viimeiset jljell olevat
hetket.

Hetken kuluttua poika tynsi lautasen luotaan ja painoi pns ksiins.
Hn tunsi ett hnell oli oikeus saada tiet totuutta. Jo kauan aikaa
sitten hnen olisi pitnyt saada tiet se, jos se, mit hn aavisti oli
totta. iti katseli hnt tuskissansa. Sanat tulivat koneellisesti hnen
huuliltansa. Hn vnteli ksissn repaleista pitsinenliinaa. Kun
kello li kuusi, niin poika nousi yls ja astui ovelle. Sitten hn
kntyi takaisin ja katseli iti. Heidn katseensa kohtasivat toisensa.
Hn nki idin silmien tuskallisesti rukoilevan sli. Tuo katse
raivostutti hnt.

"iti, min tahdon kysy sinulta jotakin", hn sanoi. idin silmt
kiersivt epvarmasti pitkin huonetta. Hn ei vastannut mitn. "Sano
minulle totuus. Minulla on oikeus saada se tiet. Olitko sin
naimisissa isni kanssa?"

iti huokasi syvn. Se oli helpoituksen huokaus. Tuo kauhea hetki
oli vihdoinkin tullut, tuo hetki, jota hn oli pelnnyt yt pivt,
viikko- ja kuukausimri, ja kuitenkaan hn ei tuntenut tuskaa.
Tavallaan se oli pettymyst. Kysymyksen yksinkertainen suoruus vaati
suoraa vastausta. Kohtaus ei ollut hyvin valmistettu. Se oli hnen
mielestn kuin huono harjoitus.

"En", vastasi hn ihmetellen elmn kovaa yksinkertaisuutta.

"Sitten minun isni oli roisto!" huusi poika puristaen ktens nyrkkiin:

iti pudisti ptn. "Min tiesin ettei hn ollut vapaa. Me rakastimme
toisiamme. Jos hn olisi elnyt, niin hn olisi auttanut meit. l sano
mitn pahaa hnest, poikani. Hn oli sinun issi ja hieno herra.
Hnell oli korkeita tuttavia."

Kirous psi pojan huulilta. "En min itsestni pid lukua", hn
huudahti, "mutta l anna Sibylin... Onhan hnkin hieno herra, eik
totta, joka rakastaa hnt tai sanoo ainakin rakastavansa hnt?
Hnellkin lie korkeita tuttavia."

Hetken aikaa hirve nyryytyksen tunne valtasi vaimo raukan. Hnen
pns painui alas. Hn pyyhki silmin vapisevin ksin. "Sibylill on
iti", hn mutisi, "mutta minulla ei ollut."

Poika tunsi liikutusta. Hn astui idin luo, ja kumartuen alas hn
suuteli hnt. "Olen pahoillani jos olen tuottanut sinulle tuskaa
tiedustellessani isni", hn sanoi, "mutta en voinut olla sit
tekemtt. Nyt minun tytyy lhte. Hyvsti. l unohda ett sinulla on
nyt vain yksi lapsi huolehdittavanasi ja tied, ett jos tuo mies
vahingoittaa minun sisartani, min otan hnest selkoa ja tapan hnet
kuin koiran. Sen min vannon."

Uhkauksen liioiteltu viha, hurjat liikkeet, mielettmt traagilliset
sanat -- kaikki tuo teki itiin sen vaikutuksen, ett elm nytti
hnest hiukan iloisemmalta. Tuo ilmakeh oli hnelle tuttua. Hn
hengitti vapaammin ja ensi kertaa moneen kuukauteen hn ihaili
poikaansa. Hn olisi mielelln jatkanut kohtausta samassa tunnesvyss,
mutta poika teki siit killisen lopun. Tavarat olivat kannettavat alas
ja kytettvt kiinni. Portinvartija kulki edes-takaisin. Ajurin kanssa
oli pakko tinki. Oikea hetki katosi kaikenlaisiin pikkuseikkoihin.
Pettyneen hn heilutti repaleista pitsinenliinaansa ikkunasta kun
poika lksi. Hn tunsi ett edullinen tilaisuus oli mennyt hukkaan.
Omaksi lohdutuksekseen hn sanoi Sibylille, ett elm tuntui hnest
nyt kovin yksiniselt, kun hnell ei ollut en kuin yksi lapsi
huolehdittavanaan. Hnen mieleens muistui tuo lause. Se oli
miellyttnyt hnt. Jamesin uhkauksesta hn ei sanonut mitn. Hn oli
lausunut sen niin elvsti ja draamallisesti. Hn tiesi ett he kerran
kaikki nauraisivat sille.




LUKU VI.


"Sin olet kai kuullut uutisen, Basil?" sanoi lordi Henry illalla, kun
Hallward astui pieneen huoneesen Bristolissa, jossa pyt oli katettu
kolmea henke varten.

"En, Harry", vastasi taiteilija, antaen hattunsa ja pllystakkinsa
kumartavalle edeskyvlle.

"Mik se on? Ei suinkaan mitn valtiollista? Se ei huvittaisi minua.
Alahuoneessa on tuskin ainoatakaan ihmist, jota maksaisi vaivaa
maalata, vaikka moni heist tarvitsisi kyll hiukan sivellyst."

"Dorian Gray on mennyt kihloihin", sanoi lordi Henry tarkastellen
taiteilijaa puhuessaan.

Hallward spshti ja rypisti kulmakarvojaan.

"Dorianko kihloissa!" huudahti hn. "Mahdotonta!"

"Se on aivan totta."

"Kenen kanssa?"

"Jonkun pienen nyttelijttren."

"Min en voi sit uskoa. Dorian on niin hienotunteinen."

"Dorian on liiaksi viisas, ettei hn silloin-tllin voisi tehd jotakin
tyhmyyttkin, rakas Basil."

"Eihn avioliitto ole mitn sellaista, jota voisi tehd
silloin-tllin, Harry."

"Paitsi Amerikassa", vastasi lordi Henry vitkalleen. "Mutta min en
sanonutkaan ett hn oli naimissa. Min sanoin vaan, ett hn on mennyt
kihloihin. Siin on suuri eroitus. Min muistan vallan selvsti, ett
olen naimisessa, mutta en voi lainkaan johdattaa mieleeni, ett olisin
ollut kihloissa. Olisin halukas kuulemaan, etten koskaan olekkaan ollut
kihloissa."

"Mutta ajattelehan Dorianin syntyper ja asemaa ja rikkautta. Hn on
mieletn jos hn ottaa vaimon itsen niin paljon alemmasta sdyst."

"Sano se hnelle, jos tahdot vlttmtt ett hn nai tytn, Basil.
Silloin hn sen varmaan tekee. Kun mies tekee jotakin oikein typer,
niin hnen vaikuttimensa ovat aina jaloja."

"Toivottavasti tytt on hyv, Harry. En tahtoisi, ett Dorian joutuisi
jonkun halveksittavan olennon ksiin, joka voisi vahingoittaa hnen
luonnettaan ja pilata hnen nerokkaisuuttansa."

"Oi, hn on enemmn kuin hyv -- hn on kaunis", mutisi lordi Henry
maistellen vermuthlasiansa. "Dorian sanoo, ett hn on kaunis. Eik hn
usein sellaisissa asioissa erehdy. Muotokuva, jonka maalasit hnest, on
teroittanut hnen aistiaan huomaamaan toisten ulkomuotoa. Se on muun
muassa tehnyt hneen senkin hyvn vaikutuksen. Me saamme nhd tytn
tn iltana, jollei poika unohda sopimustamme."

"Oletko sin tosissasi?"

"Aivan tosissani, Basil. Se olisi surkeata jos luulisin voivani olla
vielkin vakavampi kuin mit tll hetkell olen."

"Mutta hyvksytk sin sit, Harry?" kysyi maalari astuen edes-takaisin
huoneessa ja purren huuliaan. "Sin et suinkaan voi sit hyvksy. Sehn
on ajattelematon tyhmyys."

"Min en nykyn hyvksy enk paheksu mitn. On mieletnt asettua
elm vastaan. Me emme ole lhetetyt maailmaan julistaaksemme meidn
siveellisi ennakkoluulojamme. Min en koskaan pane huomiota siihen,
mit tavalliset ihmiset sanovat, enk min koskaan moiti miellyttvien
ihmisten tekoja. Jos joku personallisuus miellytt minua, niin hn saa
valita mit ilmaisumuotoja hyvns, ja ne miellyttvt minua. Dorian
Gray rakastuu kauniisen tyttn, joka nyttelee Julian osaa ja tahtoo
naida hnet. Miksik ei? Jos hn naisi Messalinan, niin hn ei olisi
sit vhemmn mieltkiinnittv. Tiedthn sin, etten min rupea
taistelemaan avioliittoa vastaan. Avioliiton pahin vika on se, ett
ihminen tulee epitsekkksi. Ja epitsekkt ihmiset ovat vrittmi.
Heilt puuttuu yksilllisyytt. Mutta on sellaisiakin luonteita, jotka
avioliiton kautta tulevat monipuolisemmiksi. He silyttvt
itsekkyytens ja saavat viel monta muutakin itse. Heidn tytyy
viett useampia olemassaoloja. He saavuttavat korkeamman kehityksen, ja
korkeamman kehityksen saavuttaminen minun luullakseni onkin ihmisen
elmn tarkoitus. Sit paitsi kaikki kokemukset ovat arvokkaita, ja
avioliitto, mit hyvns sit vastaan voi sanoakkin, on tietysti
kokemus. Min toivon, ett Dorian Gray ottaa tuon tytn vaimokseen,
ihailee hnt silmittmsti kuusi kuukautta ja sitten kki rakastuu
johonkin toiseen. Hnt olisi hyvin hauska tutkia."

"Sin et tarkoita ainoatakaan sanaa tuosta mit sanot, Harry, sen tiedt
itsekkin. Jos Dorian Grayn elm turmeltuisi, niin ei kukaan surisi sit
haikeammin kuin sin. Sin olet paljoa parempi kuin miksi tekeydyt."

Lordi Henry nauroi. "Syy siihen, ett me niin mielellmme tahdomme
ajatella hyv toisista, on se ett me pelkmme itsemme. Optimismin
pohjana on vain pelko. Me luulemme olevamme jalomielisi sen vuoksi,
ett uskomme naapurillamme olevan niit hyveit, jotka voisivat olla
meille itsellemme hydyksi. Me ylistmme pankkiiria, jotta voisimme
saada hnelt rahoja yli saamatilimme, ja nemme hyvi ominaisuuksia
rosvossa siin toivossa, ett hn sstisi meidn taskujamme. Min
tarkoitan aivan kaikkea, mit min sanoin, ja min halveksin suuresti
optimismia. Mit turmeltuneesen elmn tulee, niin ei mikn elm ole
turmeltunut paitsi se, jonka kehityst on ehkisty. Jos tahdot turmella
luontoa, niin sinun tulee vain koettaa parantaa sit. Tietysti naiminen
olisi tyhmyytt, sill onhan paljoa hauskempia siteit olemassa miesten
ja naisten vlill. Min tietysti puolustaisin niit. Niill on sekin
viehtys, ett ne ovat muodissa. Mutta tuossahan on Dorian itse. Hn voi
sanoa sinulle enemmn kuin min."

"Rakas Harry, ja rakas Basil, onnitelkaa kumpikin minua!" sanoi
nuorukainen heitten yltn iltavaippansa, jossa oli silkkiset
rinnusliepeet, ja pudistaen kummankin ystvns ktt vuoron jlkeen.
"En koskaan ole ollut nin onnellinen. Tietysti se tuli kki: kaikki
hyv tulee kki. Ja kuitenkin minusta tuntuu kuin olisin odottanut tt
koko elmni." Hn punoitti ilosta ja liikutuksesta ja oli ihmeen kaunis
katsoa.

"Toivottavasti sin saat aina olla onnellinen, Dorian", sanoi Hallward,
"mutta min en voi oikein antaa sinulle anteeksi sit, ettet ilmoittanut
minulle kihlaustasi. Sin ilmoitit sen Harrylle."

"Ja min en anna sinulle anteeksi sit, ett tulit myhn
pivllisille", sanoi lordi Henry nauraen, laskien ktens nuorukaisen
olkaplle. "Kydn pytn ja koetetaan mihin uusi kokkimme kelpaa. Ja
sitten sin kerrot meille koko jutun."

"Siit ei ole paljon kerrottavaa", sanoi Dorian, kun he istuivat pienen,
pyren pydn reen. "Nin se vain kvi. Kun erosin eilen sinusta,
Harry, niin pukeuduin, sin hiukan pivllist siin pieness
italialaisessa ravintolassa Rupert Streetin varrella, jonka sin olet
neuvonut minulle, ja lksin kello kahdeksan teatteriin. Sibyl nytteli
Rosalindaa. Tietysti nyttmllepano oli hirve ja Orlando kauhea. Mutta
Sibyl! Olisittepa nhnyt hnet! Kun hn astui nyttmlle pojan puvussa,
niin hn oli kerrassaan ihastuttava. Hnen samettitakkinsa oli sammaleen
vihre, hiat kanelinruskeat, ohuitten ruskeitten sukkien ymprille
olivat nauhat ristiin sidotut, haukansulka oli hohtokivell kiinnitetty
somaan pieneen, vihren hattuun, ja huippukauluksinen, punavuorinen
vaippa riippui olkapill. Sen suloisempana en ole nhnyt hnt. Hn oli
yht sulava vartaloltaan kuin sinun tanagrapystykuvasi kirjastossasi,
Basil. Hnen hiuksensa khertyivt hnen kasvojensa ymprill kuin
tummat lehdet vaalean ruusun ymprill. Ja hnen nyttelemisens -- no
niin, te saatte itse nhd hnet illalla. Hn on synnyltn taiteilija.
Min istuin aivan haltioissani likaisessa aitiossa. Unohdin ett olin
Lontoossa ja ett elin yhdeksnnesstoista vuosisadassa. Olin mielestni
armaani kanssa kaukana metsss, jota ei kukaan ihminen ollut koskaan
nhnyt. Kun nytnt oli lopussa, niin min menin nyttmlle ja puhuin
hnen kanssansa. Istuessamme yhdess hnen silmiins tuli kki ilme,
jota en ollut koskaan ennen nhnyt niiss. Minun huuleni lhenivt hnt
kohti. Me suutelimme toisiamme. En voi selitt teille, mit sin
hetken tunsin. Minusta tuntui kuin koko minun elmni olisi supistunut
yhdeksi ainoaksi ruusunhohteiseksi iloksi. Hn vapisi koko ruumiissaan
ja vrhteli kuin valkoinen narsissi. Sitten hn heittytyi polvilleen
ja suuteli minun ksini. Minun ei pitisi kertoa teille kaikkea tt,
mutta en voi olla kertomattakaan. Tietysti meidn kihlauksemme on suuri
salaisuus. Hn ei ole kertonut sit idilleenkn. En tied mit
holhoojani siihen sanoo. Lordi Radley suuttuu varmaan silmittmsti.
Mutta min en vlit siit. Ei tytt vuottakaan, niin olen
tysi-ikinen, ja sitten saan tehd mit mielin. Enk ole tehnyt oikein,
Basil, kun olen etsinyt armaani runoudesta, ja vaimoni Shakespearen
nytelmist? Huulet, joita Shakespeare on opettanut puhumaan, ovat
kuiskanneet salaisuutensa minun korvaani. Rosalinda on kietonut
ksivartensa minun kaulaani ja min olen suudellut Julian suuta."

"Niin, Dorian, kai sin olet tehnyt oikein", sanoi Hallward hitaasti.

"Oletko nhnyt hnt tnn?" kysyi lordi Henry.

Dorian Gray pudisti ptn. "Min jtin hnet Ardenin metsn ja lydn
hnet Veronan yrttitarhasta."

Lordi Henry maisteli shampanjaansa miettivisen. "Miss tilaisuudessa
sin puhuit hnelle naimisesta, Dorian? Ja mit hn vastasi? Ehk olet
unohtanut koko sen puolen."

"Rakas Harry, min en ole harjoittanut mitn kuivaa asianajoa, enk
muodollisesti kosinutkaan. Min sanoin hnelle vain, ett rakastin
hnt, ja hn vastasi ettei hn ollut kyllin hyv minun vaimokseni. Ei
kyllin hyv! Koko maailma ei ole minkn arvoinen hnen rinnallansa."

"Naiset ovat ihmeellisen kytnnllisi", mutisi lordi Henry, -- "paljon
kytnnllisemmt kuin me. Tuollaisissa tapauksissa me emme muista
sanallakaan mainita avioliittoa, ja he muistuttavat aina meit siit."

Hallward laski ktens hnen ksivarrelleen. "l huoli, Harry. Sin
loukkaat Doriania. Hn ei ole toisten miesten kaltainen. Hn ei koskaan
tuota onnettomuutta kellekn. Hn on liian hienotunteinen."

Lordi Henry katsoi yli pydn. "Dorian ei koskaan loukkaudu minuun", hn
vastasi. "Min tein tuon kysymyksen kaikkein parhaimmassa
tarkoituksessa, siin ainoassa tarkoituksessa tosiaan, joka puolustaa
jokaista kysymyst -- nimittin uteliaisuudesta. Minun mielipiteeni on
se, ett naiset aina kosivat meit, me emme kosi heit. Poikkeuksena on
tietysti keskiluokka. Mutta keskiluokka ei seuraakkaan aikaansa."

Dorian Gray nauroi ja heitti ptn taakse. "Sin olet aivan
parantumaton, Harry. Mutta en min siit vlit. Sinuun on mahdoton
suuttua. Kun net Sibyl Vanen, niin tiedt ett se mies, joka tekisi
vryytt hnelle, olisi sydmetn peto. En ymmrr, kuinka joku
tahtoisi saattaa hpen sen, jota hn rakastaa. Min rakastan Sibyl
Vanea. Min tahdon nostaa hnet kultapiedestaalille ja nhd maailman
jumaloivan sit naista, joka on minun omani. Mit on avioliitto?
Peryttmtn lupaus. Sen vuoksi sin pilkkaat sit. Oi, l pilkkaa. Se
on peryttmtn lupaus, jonka min olen valmis antamaan. Hnen
luottamuksensa tekee minut uskolliseksi, hnen uskonsa tekee minut
hyvksi. Kun olen hnen kanssansa, niin kadun kaikkea sit, mit minulle
olet opettanut. Min muutun toiseksi, kuin min olet oppinut minua
tuntemaan. Min olen muuttunut, ja Sibyl Vanen kden kosketuskin saattaa
minut unohtamaan sinut ja kaikki sinun vrt, kiehtovat, myrkylliset,
ihanat teoriasi."

"Ja mitk ne ovat?" kysyi lordi Henry ottaen salaattia.

"Ah, sinun teoriasi elmst, sinun teoriasi rakkaudesta ja sinun
teoriasi nautinnosta. Yleens kaikki sinun teoriasi, Harry."

"Ainoastaan nautinnosta kannattaa olla teorioja", hn vastasi matalalla,
sointuvalla nelln. "Mutta min pelkn, etten voi omistaa teoriojani
omikseni. Ne ovat luonnon omia, eivtk minun. Nautinto on luonnon
tunnusmerkki, tapa, mill se osoittaa hyvksymist. Kun me olemme
onnellisia, niin me olemme aina hyvi, mutta kun me olemme hyvi, niin
me emme aina ole onnellisia."

"Mutta mit sin tarkoitat hyvyydell?" huudahti Basil Hallward.

"Niin, mit", toisti Dorian nojautuen tuolin selk vasten ja katsellen
lordi Henry purppuranpunaisten kurjenmiekkojen yli, jotka seisoivat
keskell pyt, "mit sin tarkoitat hyvyydell, Harry?"

"Olla hyv on samaa kuin olla sopusoinnussa itsens kanssa", vastasi
lordi Henry tarttuen lasinsa ohueen jalkaan valkoisilla, kapeilla
sormillaan. "Epsointu syntyy siten, ett ihmist pakoitetaan
sopusointuun toisten kanssa. Jokaisen oma elm -- niin, se on kaikista
trkein. Mit toisten ihmisten elmn tulee, niin ne eivt liikuta
meit, vaikka voivathan teeskentelijt ja puritanit kopeillen lausua
siveellisi mielipiteitn niiden johdosta. Sit paitsi on
yksilllisyyden pmaali paljoa korkeammalla. Nykyaikainen siveys
esiintyy siin, ett se alistuu aikansa mittakaavaan. Minun mielestni
jokainen sivistynyt mies, joka alistuu aikansa mittakaavaan, on
suurimmassa mrss epsiveellinen."

"Mutta jos ihminen el vain itsens varten, Harry, niin hn maksaa
hirvittvn hinnan siit", sanoi maalari.

"Niin, me saamme nykyn maksaa kaikesta liian korkean hinnan. Minun
luullakseni kyhien todellinen tragedia on siin, ettei heill ole varaa
muuhun kuin kieltytymiseen. Kauniit synnit samoinkuin kauniit tavarat
kuuluvat rikkaiden etuoikeuksiin."

"Voi toisellakin tapaa maksaa kuin rahoilla."

"Mill tavalla, Basil?"

"Ah! omantunnonvaivoilla, luullakseni, krsimyksill ja ... niin,
alentumisen tunnolla."

Lordi Henry kohotti olkapitn. "Rakas ystv, keskiaikuinen taide on
ihastuttava, mutta keskiaikuiset ajatukset ovat vanhentuneet. Tietysti
niit voi kytt romaaneissa. Mutta romaaneissa voi kytt vain sit,
mist todellisuudessa on luopunut. Usko minua, sivistynyt mies ei
koskaan kadu nautintoa, ja sivistymtn mies ei tied mit nautinto on."

"Min tiedn mit nautinto on", huudahti Dorian Gray. "Se on toisen
ihailemista."

"Se on tietysti parempaa kuin olla itse ihailun esineen", vastasi lordi
Henry leikitellen hedelmill. "Toisten ihailu on iljettv. Naiset
kohtelevat meit aivan samalla tavalla kuin ihmiskunta jumaliaan. He
jumaloivat meit, ja me olemme pakoitetut tekemn jotain heidn
hyvksens."

"Min tahtoisin vitt, ett sen mink he meilt pyytvt, he ensin
antavat meille", sanoi nuorukainen vakavasti. "He herttvt rakkauden
eloon meiss. Heill on oikeus vaatia sit takaisin."

"Se on aivan totta, Dorian", sanoi Hallward.

"Ei mikn ole koskaan aivan totta", sanoi lordi Henry.

"Mutta tm on", keskeytti Dorian. "Sinun tytyy mynt, Harry, ett
naiset antavat miehille elmn kullan."

"Ehk", huokasi hn, "mutta he vaativat sen melkein aina takaisin
pikkurahoissa. Se on kiusallista. Naiset, niinkuin ers sukkela
ranskalainen kerran sanoi, innostuttavat meit luomaan suuria
mestariteoksia, mutta estvt meit niit suorittamasta."

"Harry, sin olet julma! En ymmrr, miksi min pidn sinusta niin
paljon."

"Sin tulet aina pitmn minusta, Dorian", hn vastasi. "Tahdotteko
kahvia, pojat? -- Edeskyp, kahvia, konjakkia ja paperosseja. Ei, ei
paperosseja, minulla on itsellni. Basil, sin et saa polttaa sikareja.
Ota mielemmin paperossi. Paperossi on tydellisen nautinnon tydellisin
perikuva. Se on tydellinen ja antaa kuitenkin vain puolinaista
tyydytyst. Mit enemp me voimme vaatia? Niin, Dorian, sin tulet aina
pitmn minusta. Min edustan sinulle kaikkia niit syntej, joihin
sinulla ei koskaan ole ollut rohkeutta tehd itsesi syypksi."

"Mit hullutusta sin puhut, Harry!" huudahti nuorukainen ottaen tulta
paperossiinsa hopeisesta tultaryppyvst lohikrmeest, jonka
edeskyp oli asettanut pydlle. "Lhdetn teatteriin. Kun Sibyl tulee
nyttmlle, niin saat uuden elmn ihanteen. Hn avaa sinulle maailman,
jota et koskaan ole tuntenut."

"Min olen koettanut kaikkia", sanoi lordi Henry silmissn vsynyt
ilme, "mutta min olen aina altis vastaanottamaan uusia vaikuttimia.
Mutta min pelkn, ettei sellaisia ole en minun varaltani. Ehkp
sinun ihmeellinen tyttsi voi kuitenkin temmata minut mukanaan. Min
rakastan nytelmtaidetta. Se on paljoa todellisempaa kuin elm.
Lhdetn nyt, Dorian, tule sin minun kanssani. Olen pahoillani, Basil,
mutta minun vaunuissani on vain tilaa kahdelle. Sin saat ottaa ajurin."

He nousivat pydst, panivat pllystakit plleen ja tyhjensivt
kahvikuppinsa seisoalta. Maalari oli neti ja hajamielinen. Hnen
mieltns painosti. Hnen oli vaikea ajatella tt avioliittoa, ja
kuitenkin se oli hnest onnellisempaa kuin moni muu asia, joka olisi
voinut tapahtua. Hetken kuluttua he astuivat kaikin alas portaita. Hn
ajoi yksin, niinkuin oli sovittu ja seurasi pienten ajoneuvojen
tuikkivia tulia edessns. Hnet valtasi omituinen yksinisyyden tunne.
Hn tunsi ettei Dorian Gray voisi en koskaan olla hnelle sama kuin
ennen. Elm oli tullut heidn vliins... Hnen silmns synkistyivt,
ja vkirikkaat, valoisat kadut hmittivt himmein hnen edessns.
Kun ajoneuvot pyshtyivt teatterin edustalle, niin oli hn mielestn
tullut vuosia vanhemmaksi.




LUKU VII


Miten lie ollutkaan tn iltana, teatteri oli tpsen tynn, ja lihava
juutalainen johtaja oli heit ovella vastassa, kiiltv, vrjv
hymyily huulilla, joka veti hnen suunsa aina korviin saakka. Hn
saattoi heidt aitioon jonkunmoisella korskealla nyryydell, liikutteli
lihavia, hohtokivill koristettuja sormiaan ja puhui kimakalla nell.
Dorian Gray inhosi hnt nyt enemmn kuin koskaan ennen. Hnest tuntui
iknkuin hn olisi tullut katselemaan Mirandaa ja nhnytkin Calibanin.
Lordi Henry hn sit vastoin melkein miellytti. Ainakin hn sit
vakuutti ja pudisti hnen kttns. Ja samalla hn sanoi olevansa ylpe
tavatessaan miehen, joka oli keksinyt todellisen neron ja krsinyt
vararikon runoilijan vuoksi. Hallward katseli huviksensa takapermannolla
istuvia ihmisi. Kuumuus oli hirven tukahduttava ja jttiliskruunu
loisti kuin suuri kultalehtinen georgini. Nuoret miehet gallerialla
olivat riisuneet yltn takit ja liivit ja ripustaneet ne laidan yli. He
puhuivat toisilleen teatterin poikki ja sivt appelsiineja
prameapukuisten tyttjen kanssa, jotka istuivat heidn rinnallaan.
Muutamat naiset takapermannolla naureskelivat. Heidn nens olivat
kimakat ja epsointuiset. Korkkien paukkumista kuului ravintolan
puolelta.

"Onpa tmkin paikka, josta jumalattarensa voi lyt!" sanoi lordi
Henry.

"Niin!" vastasi Dorian Gray. "Tlt min hnet lysin, ja hn on
jumalallisin kaikista elvist olennoista. Kun hn nyttelee, niin
unohtaa koko maailman. Nm kurjat, raa'at ihmiset, joilla on karheat
kasvot ja ephieno kyts, muuttuvat kerrassaan, kun hn astuu
nyttmlle. He istuvat hiljaa ja katselevat hnt. He itkevt ja
nauravat hnen kskystns. Hn saa heidt yht herkiksi kuin viulun.
Hn hypnotiseraa heit, ja silloin tuntee selvsti, ett he ovat samaa
lihaa ja verta kuin mekin."

"Samaa lihaa ja verta kuin mekin! Ah, toivottavasti ei!" huudahti lordi
Henry, joka tarkasteli galleriayleis kiikarillansa.

"l vlit hnest, Dorian", sanoi maalari. "Min ymmrrn, mit sin
tarkoitat, ja min uskon tuohon tyttn. Jokaisen, jota sin rakastat,
tytyy olla ihmeellisen, ja jokainen tytt, joka voi vaikuttaa toisiin
sill tavalla kuin sin kuvailet, on varmaan hieno ja jalo. Hallita omia
aikalaisiaan -- sit kannattaa tehd. Jos tuo tytt voi antaa sielun
noille ihmisille, jotka ovat elneet ilman sit, jos hn voi hertt
kauneudentunteen ihmisiss, joiden elm on ollut likainen ja ruma, jos
hn voi karkoittaa heidn itsekkisyytens ja opettaa heit itkemn
toisten surujen thden, niin hn tydellisesti ansaitsee sinun
ihailuasi, ansaitsee koko maailman ihailun. Min hyvksyn tydellisesti
sinun naimisesi. Ensin en ollut sit mielt, mutta nyt mynnn sinun
olevan oikeassa. Jumalat ovat luoneet Sibyl Vanen sinua varten. Ilman
hnt et olisi ollut tydellinen."

"Kiitos, Basil", vastasi Dorian Gray pusertaen hnen kttn. "Min
tiesin, ett sin ymmrtisit minua. Harry on niin kyynillinen, hn
peloittaa minua. Mutta nyt soitto alkaa. Se on aivan hirve, mutta sit
ei kest enemp kuin viisi minuuttia. Sitten esirippu nousee, ja te
saatte nhd tytn, jolle min olen valmis uhraamaan koko elmni, jolle
olen antanut kaiken sen mik minussa on hyv."

Neljnnestuntia myhemmin myrskyisten suosionosoitusten kajahtaessa
Sibyl Vane astui nyttmlle. Niin, hn oli todellakin ihastuttava --
suloisin olento, arveli lordi Henry, mit hn koskaan ennen oli nhnyt.
Hnen arat liikkeens ja hmmstyneet silmns muistuttivat metshirve.
Hieno puna, iknkuin ruusun varjo hopeakuvastimen pinnalla, kohosi
hnen poskilleen kun hn katseli tytt, ihastunutta katsomoa. Hn astui
pari askelta taakse, ja hnen huulensa nyttivt vavahtavan. Basil
Hallward kohosi pystyyn ja alkoi taputtaa ksin. Liikkumatta,
iknkuin unessa, istui Dorian Gray katsellen hnt. Lordi Henry
thysteli kiikarillaan ja mutisi: "Ihastuttava! Ihastuttava!"

Nyttm esitti pylvhikk Capuletin talossa, ja Romeo oli astunut
pyhiinvaeltajan puvussaan nyttmlle yhdess Mercution ja toisten
ystviens kanssa. Orkesteri soitti niin hyvin kuin se taisi muutamia
tahteja ja tanssi alkoi. Keskell kmpeljen, huonosti puettujen
nyttelijiden joukkoa liikkui Sibyl Vane iknkuin ilmestys ihanammasta
maailmasta. Hnen vartalonsa huojui tanssissa kuin kukka veden pinnalla.
Hnen kaulansa oli kaareva kuin valkoisen liljan varsi. Hnen ktens
nyttivt olevan veistetyt viilest norsunluusta.

Mutta hn tuntui ihmeen vlipitmttmlt. Hn ei osoittanut
vhintkn iloa luodessaan silmns Romeoon. Nuo muutamat sanat, jotka
hnell oli sanottavana:

    Ktenne tten liiaks syyt saa,
    se hartahan vaan tytti toiminnon;
    saa pyhn ktt hurskas koskettaa,
    ja kdenanto hurskaan muisku on --

sek seuraavan lyhyen puhelun hn lausui lvitsens teeskennellyll
tavalla. ni oli ihana, mutta sen svy oli aivan vr. Sen vrityskin
oli vr. Se hvitti kokonaan kaiken elon runosta. Se teki intohimon
eptodelliseksi.

Dorian Gray kalpeni tarkatessaan hnt. Hn oli aivan ymmll ja
tuskissansa. Ei kumpainenkaan hnen ystvistns uskaltanut sanoa
hnelle sanaakaan. Tytt oli heidn mielestn kerrassaan mahdoton. He
olivat hirvesti pettyneet.

Mutta he tiesivt, ett jokaisen Julian tulikoetus oli toisen nytksen
balkongikohtauksessa. He odottivat sit. Jos hn siinkin pettisi, niin
hnest ei ollut mihinkn.

Hn nytti ihastuttavalta astuessaan kuutamoon. Sit ei voinut kielt.
Mutta hnen teeskennelty nyttelemisens oli sietmtnt ja yltyi vain
mit pitemmlle hn psi. Hnen liikkeens olivat jrjettmn
luonnottomia. Hn liioitteli kaikkea mit hnen tuli sanoa. Tuon ihanan
kohdan --

    Yn huntu, net, on kasvoillani; muuten
    hpen puna punais poskeni,
    kun puheeni sa tmniset kuulit --

hn lausui koulutytn kiusallisella tsmllisyydell, jota joku
toisluokkainen kaunoluvun opettaja on opettanut lausumaan. Kun hn
nojautui balkongin yli ja tuli thn ihanaan kohtaan --

                 Iloni vaikk' olet,
    tnisest en liitost' iloitse.
    Se liian nopsaa, kiireist', kkinist' on;
    se liiaks salaman on kaltaista,
    mi taukoo, ennenkuin saat sanotuksi:
    nyt salamoipi! Armas, hyv yt!
    Taas yhtyissmme, lemmen itu tm
    on kaunis kukka, kesn kypsyttm --

niin hn lausui sanat, iknkuin niill ei olisi ollut mitn merkityst
hnelle. Se ei ollut hermostumista, sill hn oli aivan tyyni. Se oli
vain huonoa taidetta. Tydellinen fiasko.

Kappale ei voinut yllpit edes takapermannon ja gallerian
sivistymttmn yleisn innostusta. He tulivat levottomiksi ja alkoivat
puhua neen ja vihelt. Juutalainen, joka seisoi etuparven perll
polki jalkaansa ja kiroili vihoissaan. Ainoa levollinen henkil oli
tytt itse.

Toisen nytksen jlkeen alkoivat myrskyiset vihellykset, ja lordi Henry
nousi tuoliltaan ja pani pllystakin plleen. "Tytt on ihmeen kaunis,
Dorian", hn sanoi, "mutta hn ei osaa nytell. Lhdetn pois."

"Min tahdon nhd nytelmn loppuun asti", sanoi nuorukainen kovalla,
katkeralla nell. "Olen kovin pahoillani, ett teilt minun thteni on
mennyt kokonainen ilta hukkaan. Teidn tytyy suoda se minulle
anteeksi."

"Rakas Dorian, minun luullakseni miss Vane on huononvointinen",
keskeytti Hallward puhetta. "Me tulemme uudestaan toisen kerran."

"Min toivoisin, ett hn olisi huononvointinen", vastasi Dorian. "Mutta
minusta tuntui, ett hn aivan yksinkertaisesti vain on tunteeton ja
kylm. Hn on kokonaan muuttunut. Eilen illalla hn oli suuri
taiteilija. Tnn hn on tuskin tavallinen, keskinkertainen
nyttelij."

"l puhu noin ihmisest, jota sin rakastat, Dorian. Rakkaus on
ihmeellisempi kuin taide."

"Ne ovat kumpikin vain eri matkimismuotoja", huomautti lordi Henry.
"Mutta lhdetn nyt pois. Dorian, l sinkn j tnne. Huono
nytteleminen ei vaikuta hyv ihmisen moraaliin. Sit paitsi en luule,
ett vaadit vaimoasi nyttelemn. Mitp sill siis vli, vaikka hn
nytteleekin Juliaa kuin puunukke? Hn on hyvin suloinen, ja jos hn
tuntee elm yht vhn kuin nyttelemistaidetta, niin hn on sinulle
ihastuttava kokemus. On olemassa vain kaksi lajia ihmisi, jotka
todellakin ovat ihastuttavia -- ne, jotka tietvt aivan kaikki, ja ne,
jotka eivt tied kerrassaan mitn. Hyv Jumala, rakas ystv, l
nyt noin traagilliselta! Nuorena pysymisen salaisuus on siin, ettei
koskaan antaudu sellaisten liikutusten valtaan, jotka ovat meille
sopimattomia. Tule klubiin Basilin ja minun kanssani. Me poltamme
tupakkaa ja juomme Sibyl Vanen kauneuden maljan. Hn on kaunis. Mit
muuta sin haluat?"

"Mene pois, Harry", huudahti nuorukainen. "Min tahdon olla yksin.
Basil, sinunkin tytyy lhte. Oi! ettek ne, ett sydmeni on
pakahtua?" Kuumat kyyneleet kohosivat hnen silmiins. Hnen huulensa
vapisivat ja hykten aition perlle hn nojautui sein vasten peitten
kasvonsa ksiins.

"Lhdetn pois, Basil", sanoi lordi Henry tavattoman hell svy
nessn; ja molemmat nuoret miehet lksivt yhdess pois.

Vhn myhemmin ramppitulet sytytettiin, esirippu nousi ja kolmas nyts
alkoi. Dorian Gray palasi paikoilleen. Hn nytti kalpealta, kopealta ja
vlinpitmttmlt. Nytelm kului vitkalleen eteenpin ja tuntui
loppumattomalta. Puolet yleis lksi ulos kopistaen raskaissa
jalkineissaan ja neens naureskellen. Se oli tydellinen fiasko.
Viimeinen nyts nyteltiin melkein tyhjille penkeille. Esiripun
laskeutuessa kuului tirskunaa ja rhin.

Niinpian kuin nytnt oli lopussa kiiruhti Dorian Gray kulissien taakse
nyttelijiden lmpin. Tytt seisoi siell yksin riemuisa ilme
kasvoissaan. Hnen silmissn paloi ihmeellinen tuli. Hnen ymprilln
loisti sdekeh. Hnen puoleksi avonaiset huulensa hymyilivt omalle
salaisuudelleen.

Kun Dorian astui sisn, niin tytt katsahti hneen ja retn onni
kuvastui hnen kasvoihinsa.

"Kuinka huonosti min nyttelin tnn, Dorian!" hn huudahti.

"Hirvittvsti!" hn vastasi katsoen hmmstyksissn tyttn --
"hirvittvsti! Se oli julmaa. Oletko sairas? Sinulla ei ole
aavistustakaan siit millaista se oli. Et tied kuinka julmasti min
krsin."

Tytt hymyili. "Dorian", hn vastasi lausuen vitkalleen hnen nimens
sointuvalla nelln, iknkuin se olisi ollut hunajatakin makeampaa
hnen punoittaville huulilleen -- "Dorian, sinun olisi pitnyt ymmrt.
Mutta ymmrrthn sin sen ainakin nyt?"

"Mit minun tulisi ymmrt?" kysyi hn keissn.

"Mink vuoksi tnn niin huonosti nyttelin. Mink vuoksi tst lhin
aina tulen huonosti nyttelemn. Miksi en en koskaan voi hyvin
nytell."

Dorian kohautti olkapitn. "Sin olet sairas. Sinun ei pitisi
sairaana nytell. Sin teet itsesi naurettavaksi. Sin tuskastutit
minun ystvini. Ja sin tuskastutit minua."

Tytt ei nyttnyt kuuntelevan hnt. Ilo oli kokonaan muuttanut hnet.
Hn oli onnen hurmauksen vallassa.

"Dorian, Dorian", hn huudahti, "ennenkuin tunsin sinut, nytteleminen
oli minun todellista elmni. Vain teatterissa min elin. Min luulin
sit todellisuudeksi. Yhten iltana olin Rosalinda, toisena Portia.
Beatricen ilo oli minun iloani ja Cordelian suru minun suruani. Min
uskoin kaikkeen. Nuo kehnot ihmiset, joiden kanssa nyttelin, olivat
minusta jumalallisia. Maalatut nyttmt olivat minun maailmani. En
tuntenut muuta kuin varjoja, ja min luulin niit todellisiksi. Sitten
sin tulit minun kaunis armaani! -- ja sin vapautit minun sieluni
vankeudesta. Sin opetit minulle, mit todellinen todellisuus on. Tn
iltana, ensi kertaa elissni, oivalsin miten onttoa, petollista ja
kehnoa se komeus oli, jossa min olin nytellyt. Tn iltana ensi kertaa
min huomasin, miten hirve, vanha ja maalattu Romeo oli, ett kuutamo
puutarhassa oli vr, ett nyttmllepano oli kehnoa ja ett sanat,
joita minun tuli lausua, olivat eptodellisia, eivt olleetkaan minun
sanojani, eivt olleet sit, mit min halusin sanoa. Sin olit antanut
minulle jotakin korkeampaa, jotakin jota taide vain kuvastaa. Sin olit
saattanut minua ymmrtmn mit rakkaus todellakin on. Armaani!
Armaani! Satuprinssini! Elmnruhtinaani! Min olen kyllstynyt
varjoihin. Sin olet minulle paljoa enemmn kuin kaikki taide. Mit
minua nyttmnuket liikuttavat? Kun tulin tnne tnn, niin en
ksittnyt, ett kaikki oli muuttunut. Luulin voivani nytell aivan
erinomaisesti, mutta huomasinkin etten voinutkaan. kki minulle kaikki
selvisi. Ja tuo tieto oli ihana. Min kuulin heidn vihellyksens ja
min vain hymyilin. Mitp he saattoivat tiet sellaisesta rakkaudesta
kuin meidn? Vie minut pois tlt, Dorian -- ota minut mukanasi
jonnekin, jossa voimme olla aivan yksin. Min vihaan nyttm. Min
voin nytell intohimoa, jota en tunne, mutta sit, mik polttaa minua
kuin tuli, en kykene nyttelemn. Oi, Dorian, Dorian, ymmrrthn sin
nyt mit min tarkoitin? Vaikka voisinkin, niin olisi se hvistyst jos
nyttelisin kun itse olen rakastunut. Sin olet sen opettanut minulle."

Dorian heittytyi sohvalle ja knsi pois kasvonsa. "Sin olet tappanut
minun rakkauteni", hn mutisi.

Tytt katsoi ihmeissn hneen ja naurahti. Dorian ei vastannut mitn.
Tytt tuli hnen luoksensa ja siveli hennoilla sormillaan hnen
hiuksiaan. Hn polvistui hnen eteens ja painoi hnen ktens huuliaan
vastaan. Dorian veti ne pois ja vristys kulki hnen ruumiinsa lpi.

Sitten hn hykksi pystyyn ja astui ovelle. "Niin", huudahti hn, "sin
olet tappanut minun rakkauteni. Ennen sin kiihoitit minun
mielikuvitustani. Nyt et edes hert uteliaisuuttani. Sin et vaikuta
minuun vhimmllkn tavalla. Min rakastin sinua siksi, ett olit
ihmeellinen, siksi ett olit nerokas, siksi ett sin toteutit suurten
runoilijoiden unelmia ja annoit eloa ja vri taiteen varjoille. Sin
olet nyt heittnyt kaikki pois. Sin olet pintapuolinen ja tyhm. Hyv
Jumala! Kuinka hullu min olin rakastaessani sinua! Kuinka hullu min
olen ollut? Sin et merkitse en mitn minulle. En tahdo en koskaan
nhd sinua. En tahdo en mainita sinun nimesi. Et aavista mit olet
ollut minulle. Mit olet ollut... Oi, en jaksa sit ajatellakkaan! Jospa
en koskaan olisi sinua nhnytkn! Sin olet turmellut minun elmni
runoelman. Miten vhn sin ymmrrt rakkautta, jos luulet sen
kuolettavan taiteesi! Ilman taidettasi et ole mitn. Min olisin tehnyt
sinut suureksi, kuuluisaksi ja loistavaksi. Maailma olisi jumaloinut
sinua ja sin olisit kantanut minun nimeni. Mit sin nyt olet?
Kolmannen luokan nyttelijtr, jolla on kauniit kasvot."

Tytt kalpeni ja alkoi vavista. Hn vnsi ksin ja ni tuntui
takertuvan kiinni kurkkuun.

"Sin et ole tosissasi, Dorian?" hn mutisi. "Sin vain nyttelet."

"Vai nyttelen! Sen min jtn sinulle. Sin teet sit niin mainiosti",
hn vastasi katkerasti.

Tytt kohosi polviltaan ja tuskallinen ilme kasvoissaan hn astui Dorian
luo. Hn tarttui hnt ksivarteen kiinni ja katsoi hnt silmiin.
Dorian tynsi hnet luotaan. "l kajoo minuun!" hn huudahti.

Hiljainen valitus psi tytn huulilta, ja hn heittytyi nuorukaisen
jalkoihin ja makasi siin kuin poljettu kukka. "Dorian, Dorian, l
hylk minua!" hn kuiskasi. "Olen niin pahoillani, etten nytellyt
hyvin. Min ajattelin sinua koko ajan. Mutta min tahdon koettaa --
todellakin, min tahdon koettaa. Minun rakkauteni sinuun, se valtasi
minut niin kki. Luulenpa etten koskaan olisi tuntenut sit, jollet
sin olisi suudellut minua -- jollemme olisi suudelleet toisiamme.
Suutele minua, armaani. l jt minua. Minun veljeni ... ei, ei siit
ole vli. Hn ei sit tarkoittanut. Hn laski vain leikki. Mutta sin,
oi, etk voi tt iltaa antaa minulle anteeksi? Min tahdon tehd
kovasti tyt, ja koettaa hyvitt kaikki. l ole minulle julma, sen
vuoksi ett rakastan sinua enemmn kuin mitn muuta maailmassa. Tmn
ainoan kerranhan olen pahoittanut mieltsi. Mutta sin olet oikeassa,
Dorian. Minun olisi pitnyt olla enemmn taiteilija. Min olin jrjetn;
mutta en voinut sit auttaa. Oi, l hylk minua, l hylk minua."

Kouristuksen tapainen nyyhkytys vrisytti hnt. Hn kpertyi kokoon
lattialla kuin haavoitettu elin, ja Dorian Gray loi hneen kauniit
silmns samalla kuin syv halveksumisen ilme vrhteli hnen
hienopiirteisill huulillansa. Sen ihmisen tunteenpurkaukset, jota me
emme en rakasta, tekevt meihin aina naurettavan vaikutuksen. Sibyl
Vane tuntui hnest hirven melodraamalliselta. Hnen kyyneleens ja
nyyhkytyksens ikvystyttivt hnt.

"Min menen", sanoi Dorian vihdoin tyynell, selvll nell. "En tahdo
olla sinulle epystvllinen, mutta minun on mahdoton sinua en nhd.
Olet pahoittanut mieltni."

Tytt itki hiljaa eik vastannut mitn, mutta hn rymi Doriania
lhemmksi. Hnen pienet ktens ojentautuivat vaistomaisesti ja
nyttivt tavoittelevan hnt. Dorian kntyi ympri ja lksi pois
huoneesta. Muutaman silmnrpyksen kuluttua hn ei ollut en
teatterissa.

Dorian tuskin tiesi minne hn meni. Hn muisti vaeltaneensa himmesti
valaistujen katujen lpi, kulkeneensa kurjien, pimeitten porttien ja
synkkien talojen ohi. Kovaniset naiset olivat raa'asti nauraen
huutaneet hnen jlkeens. Juopot olivat horjuvin askelin kulkeneet
hnen ohitsensa itsekseen puhellen kuin muodottomat apinat. Hn oli
nhnyt kurjia lapsia kyhnttvn talojen kynnyksill ja kuullut huutoa
ja kirouksia pimeilt pihamailta.

Aamun sarastaessa hn huomasi olevansa aivan lhell Covent Gardenia.
Pimeys hlveni ja vienon valon punaamana taivas kaareutui iknkuin
ihanaksi helmeksi. Suuret vankkurit tynn nuokkuvia liljoja vierivt
vitkalleen pitkin sile, tyhj katua. Ilma oli tynn kukkien vkev
tuoksua, ja niiden kauneus nytti lievittvn hnen tuskaansa. Hn
seurasi kuormaa torille saakka ja katseli, miten miehet purkivat
vaunulastiaan. Valkeapukuinen ajaja tarjosi hnelle muutamia kirsikoita.
Hn kiitti hnt, ja ihmetteli miksikhn mies kieltytyi ottamasta
vastaan maksua, ja alkoi neti syd niit. Ne olivat sydnyn aikana
poimitut ja kuun viileys oli tunkeutunut niihin. Pitk jono poikia,
jotka kantoivat suurissa koreissa monivrisi tulpaaneja ja keltaisia ja
punaisia ruusuja, kulki hnen ohitsensa tunkeutuen suurten
vihanneskasojen vlitse. Katoksen alla, jota harmaat, auringonpaahtamat
pilarit kannattivat, odotti joukko likaisia, avopisi tyttj
huutokaupan loppumista. Toiset tunkeilivat torilla olevien kahvilojen
edustalla. Raskaat vankkurihevoset luisuivat ja polkivat liukkailla
katukivill, ravistellen kulkusiaan ja valjaitaan. Jotkut ajajat olivat
heittytyneet makaamaan skkiljlle. Kirjavakaulaiset ja punajalkaiset
kyyhkyset hyppelivt edes-takaisin noukkien siemeni.

Hetken kuluttua Dorian Gray huusi ajuria ja ajoi kotiin. Jonkun aikaa
hn seisoskeli rappusilla katsellen ymprilleen ja tarkastellen
hiljaista toria, sen kiiltvi, suljettuja ikkunoita ja kirjavia
uutimia. Taivas oli nyt opaalinvrinen, ja talojen katot kimaltelivat
hopeanhohteisina sit kohti. Erst savupiipusta vastapt kohosi
hieno savukiehkura. Se kierteli kuin sinipunertava nauha
helmiisvrisess ilmassa.

Suuressa kullatussa venetsialaisessa lyhdyss, joka aikoinaan oli
rystetty jonkun doogin gondolista ja nyt riippui suuren, tammella
laudoitetun etehisen katossa, paloi yh kolme lekuttelevaa kynttiln
liekki, iknkuin ohuita, sinertvi, tulenreunustamia terlehti. Hn
sammutti ne ja heitettyn pllystakkinsa ja hattunsa pydlle, hn
kulki kirjaston kautta alakerroksessa olevaan makuuhuoneesensa, suureen
kahdeksankulmaiseen huoneesen, jonka hn hiljattain, seuraten
vastahernnytt ylellisyyshaluansa, oli sisustuttanut uudestaan
renessansitapeteilla, mitk hn oli lytnyt asumattomasta
ullakkokamarista Selby Royalista. Kun hn knsi oven kahvaa, niin hnen
silmns osuivat muotokuvaan, jonka Basil Hallward oli maalannut
hnest. Hn kavahti hmmstyneen askeleen taakse. Sitten hn meni
omaan huoneesensa hiukan hmmentyneen nkisen. Epriden hn otti
kukan takkinsa napinlvest. Sitten hn palasi takaisin kirjastoon,
astui kuvan eteen ja tarkasteli sit. Himmess, heikossa valossa, joka
virtasi sisn kellertvien silkkiuutimien lpi, kasvot nyttivt hiukan
muuttuneilta. Ilme oli toinen kuin ennen. Olisi voinut vitt, ett
suun ymprill karehteli nyt julmuuteen vivahtava piirre. Se oli hyvin
merkillist.

Hn kntyi poispin, astui ikkunan reen ja veti yls uutimet. Kirkas
aamuvalo virtasi huoneesen ja karkoitti oudot varjot pimeihin
sokkeloihin, jonne ne jivt vrjmn. Mutta vieras ilme, jonka hn
oli huomannut muotokuvan kasvoissa, nytti yh siin pysyvn, ja
muuttuvan entistn selvemmksi. Kimaltelevassa, voimakkaassa
auringonvalossa esiintyivt julmuutta ilmaisevat piirteet suun ymprill
niin selvin, iknkuin hn olisi katsahtanut peiliin suoritettuaan
jonkun ilkityn.

Hnt vrisytti, ja otettuaan pydlt soikean peilin, jonka kehyksess
norsunluiset kupidot kisailivat -- sekin yksi lordi Henryn monista
lahjoista -- hn loi silmns nopeasti sen kiiltv syvyytt kohti.
Sellaista piirrett ei ollut hnen punaisten huuliensa ymprill. Mit
tuo saattoi merkit?

Hn hieroi silmin, astui aivan kuvan eteen ja tarkasteli sit
uudelleen. Katsellessaan itse maalausta hn ei voinut huomata
minknlaista muutosta, mutta sittenkin ilme oli muuttunut, siit ei
ollut epilystkn. Se ei ollut turhaa mielikuvitusta, vaan julmaa
todellisuutta.

Hn heittytyi tuoliin ja rupesi ajattelemaan. kki hnen mieleens
muistui mit hn oli sanonut Basil Hallwardin atelierissa samana
pivn, jolloin kuva oli valmistunut. Niin, hn muisti sen tsmllens.
Hn oli lausunut sen jrjettmn toiveen, ett hn itse saisi pysy
nuorena, mutta ett kuva vanhenisi, ett hnen oma kauneutensa ei
kuihtuisi, vaan ett maalattu kuva kantaisi hnen intohimojensa ja
syntiens taakkaa, ett maalattuun kuvaan suru ja ajatukset uurtaisivat
vakonsa, mutta ett hn itse saisi silytt vasta hernneen nuoruutensa
ensi kukoistuksen ja sulouden. Oliko hnen toivonsa toteutunut? Sehn
olisi ollut mahdotonta. Yksin sellainen ajatuskin oli mahdoton. Ja
kuitenkin, tuossahan oli kuva hnen edessns, ja sen suun ymprill
karehteli julma piirre.

Julma! Oliko hn ollut julma? Syy oli tytn, eik hnen. Hn oli
uneksinut, ett tytst tulisi taiteilija, oli rakastunut hneen sen
vuoksi, ett hn oli luullut hnt suureksi. Sitten tytt oli
pahoittanut hnen mieltns. Hn oli ollut pintapuolinen ja kelvoton.
Mutta sittenkin hnet valtasi katumuksen tunne, kun hn muisti miten
tytt oli maannut maassa hnen jalkojensa juuressa ja nyyhkyttnyt kuin
pieni lapsi. Hn muisti miten kylmsti hn oli katsellut hnt. Miksi
hn oli tuollainen? Miksi hnen sielunsa oli luotu senkaltaiseksi? Mutta
olihan hnkin krsinyt. Niin kolmena hirven tuntina nytnnn
kestess hn oli kokenut koko vuosisadan tuskat ja krsimykset. Olihan
hnen oma elmns samanarvoinen kuin tytnkin. Tytt oli turmellut
hnelt illan, jos kohta hn oli loukannutkin tytt koko elmn ajaksi.
Mutta naiset jaksavat kantaa surua paremmin kuin miehet. He elvt
tunteillansa. He ajattelevat vain tunteitansa. Kun he ottavat rakastajan
itsellens, niin he tekevt sen vain siksi, ett heill olisi joku,
jonka kanssa he voisivat saada aikaan kohtauksia. Lordi Henry oli
sanonut sen hnelle ja lordi Henry tunsi naiset. Miksi hn antaisi Sibyl
Vanen hirit rauhaansa? Eihn hn merkinnyt hnelle en mitn.

Mutta kuva? Mill hn sen seikan selittisi? Siin piili hnen elmns
salaisuus ja se antoi ilmi hnen elmntarinansa. Se oli opettanut hnt
rakastamaan omaa kauneuttansa. Opettaisikohan se hnt inhoamaan omaa
sieluaan? Voisikohan hn koskaan en katsella sit?

Ei, se oli vain harhanky, jonka hnen kiihoittuneet aistinsa olivat
nostattaneet. Vasta kulunut hirve y oli manannut aaveita esille. Hnen
aivoihinsa oli kki satanut tuota tulipunaista vihmaa, joka tekee
ihmisen hulluksi. Kuva ei ollut muuttunut. Hullua oli ajatellakaan
mitn sellaista.

Sittenkin se tarkasteli hnt kauniilla, vristyneill piirteilln ja
julmalla hymyilylln. Vaalea tukka loisti aamuauringon valossa. Siniset
silmt kohdistuivat hneen. Ja hnen mielens valtasi syv slin tunne,
ei hnen itsens, mutta oman maalatun muotokuvansa thden. Se oli jo
muuttunut, ja se muuttuisi yh enemmn. Sen kulta kuihtuisi harmaaksi.
Sen punaiset ja valkeat ruusut lakastuisivat. Jokainen synti, johon hn
tekisi itsens syypksi, tahrasi ja turmelisi sen kauneutta. Mutta hn
ei vajoaisikaan syntiin. Tuo kuva, muuttuneena tai muuttumattomana,
olisi hnen omantuntonsa nkyvn vertauskuvana. Hn vastustaisi
viettelyst. Hn ei etsisi en lordi Henryn seuraa -- ei ainakaan
kuuntelisi hnen myrkyllisi teoriojaan, jotka Basil Hallwardin
puutarhassa ensi kertaa olivat saattaneet hnet himoitsemaan
mahdottomuuksia. Hn palaisi takaisin Sibyl Vanen luo, hyvittisi
kaikki, naisi hnet ja koettaisi rakastaa hnt jlleen. Niin, se oli
hnen velvollisuutensa. Sibyl oli varmaan krsinyt paljon enemmn kuin
hn. Lapsi rukka! Hn oli ollut itseks ja kohdellut hnt julmasti.
Lumous, joka hnet Sibylin lsnollessa oli vallannut, palaisi varmaan
takaisin. He elisivt onnellisina yhdess, hnen elmns hnen
rinnallaan pysyisi kauniina ja puhtaana.

Dorian nousi yls ja asetti varjostimen kuvan eteen; hnt vrisytti
katsoessaan siihen. "Kuinka hirve!" hn mutisi itseksens, ja meni
lasioven luo avataksensa sen. Kun hn astui ruohokentlle, niin hn veti
syvlt henken. Raitis aamuilma nytti karkoittavan kaikki synkt
ajatukset. Hn ajatteli vain Sibylia. Rakkaus hersi hness jlleen
heikkona kajahduksena. Hn toisti hnen nimens yh uudestaan ja
uudestaan. Linnut, jotka visersivt kasteen kostuttamassa puutarhassa,
nyttivt kertovan hnest kukkasille.




LUKU VIII.


Hn hersi vasta myhn puolenpivn jlkeen. Hnen kamaripalvelijansa,
joka usean kerran oli hiipinyt varpaillaan huoneesen nhdkseen eik hn
jo liikkunut, ihmetteli minkhn vuoksi hnen nuori isntns nukkui
niin kauan. Vihdoin kello soi, ja Viktor tuli nettmsti sisn
kantaen pienell Sevresporsliinisella tarjottimella kupillisen teet ja
kasan kirjeit. Suurien ikkunoiden edest hn veti syrjn
oliivinvriset silkkiuutimet, joiden vuori vivahteli sinivriin.

"Tnn monsieur on nukkunut hyvin", hn sanoi hymyillen.

"Mit kello on, Viktor?" kysyi Dorian Gray unisesti.

"Neljnneksen yli yhden, monsieur."

"Kuinka myhist!" Hn nousi istualleen ja maistettuaan hiukan teet,
hn katseli kirjeitn. Yksi oli lordi Henrylt, lhetti oli sen tuonut
tn aamuna. Hn epri hetken aikaa, ja asetti sen sitten syrjn.
Toiset hn avasi vlinpitmttmsti. Siin oli tavallinen mr
kortteja, pivlliskutsuja, pilettej yksityisnyttelyihin, ohjelmia
hyvntekevisyyskonsertteihin ja muuta senkaltaista, joita joka aamu
kevtkauden aikana tulvailee hienoille nuorille herroille. Joukossa oli
varsin suuri laskukin Ludvig XV:nnen tyylisest, taiteellisesti
taotusta, hopeisesta toilettikalustosta, jota hn ei ollut uskaltanut
viel lhett holhoojillensa. He olivat hyvin vanhanaikaista vke,
eivtk ymmrtneet, ett me elmme aikakautena, jossa tarpeettomat
esineet ovat ainoat tarpeelliset. Olipa joukossa hyvin kohteliaita
kirjeit koronkiskureiltakin Jennyn Streetin varrelta, jotka milloin
hyvns olivat valmiit antamaan hnelle vaikka kuinka suuria summia
kaikkein kohtuullisimmilla ehdoilla.

Noin kymmenen minuutin kuluttua hn nousi yls, heitti ylleen hienon,
silkill kirjaillun aamunutun villakasmiri kankaasta, ja meni
kylpyhuoneeseen, jonka lattia oli onyks-kivist tehty. Raitis vesi
virkisti hnt pitkn unen jlkeen. Hn nytti unohtaneen kaikki
krsimyksens. Vain pari kertaa hmrn aavistuksena hersi hnen
mielessn ajatus, ett hn oli ollut osallisena jossakin oudossa
murhenytelmss, mutta tuo ajatus oli yht epmrinen kuin unelma.

Heti pukeuduttuaan hn meni kirjastoonsa ja istui keven ranskalaisen
aamiaisen reen, joka oli katettu pienelle pyrelle pydlle avonaisen
ikkunan reen. Oli ihana piv. Lmmin ilma oli tynn suloisia
tuoksuja. Mehilinen pyrhti huoneesen ja kierteli sinisen kukkamaljakon
ymprill, joka seisoi hnen edessn tynn rikkikeltaisia ruusuja. Hn
oli tysin onnellinen.

kki hnen silmns osuivat varjostimeen, jonka hn oli asettanut
muotokuvan eteen, ja hn stkhti.

"Tuntuuko kylmlt, monsieur?" kysyi kamaripalvelija laskien omletin
pydlle. "Suljenko ikkunan?"

Dorian pudisti ptn. "Minun ei ole kylm", hn mutisi.

Oliko se totta? Oliko kuva todellakin muuttunut? Vai mielikuvitusko vain
oli loihtinut esiin tuon ilken ilmeen, joka ennen oli ilmaissut vain
iloa? Tietystikn maalattu kangas ei voinut muuttua? Sehn oli aivan
jrjetnt. Se oli hyv juttu, jota kelpaisi kerran Basilille kertoa. Se
huvittaisi hnt.

Ja kuitenkin miten elvsti hn muisti koko tuon tapahtuman! Ensin
puolihmrss, sitten kirkkaassa aamuvalossa hn oli nhnyt tuon julman
ilmeen kaarevien huulten ymprill. Hn pelksi melkein sit hetke,
jolloin kamaripalvelija poistuisi huoneesta. Hn tiesi, ett hnen yksin
jtyns oli pakko tarkastaa muotokuvaa. Hn pelksi varmuutta. Kun
kahvi ja paperossit olivat tuodut ja mies kntyi mennksens, niin hn
tunsi hurjaa halua pyyt hnt jmn. Kun ovi oli sulkeutumassa hnen
jlkeens, niin Dorian kutsui hnet takaisin. Mies seisahtui odottamaan
ksky. Dorian tarkasteli hnt hetken aikaa. "Min en ota ketn
vastaan, Viktor", hn sanoi huoaten. Mies kumarsi ja poistui.

Sitten hn nousi pydn rest, sytytti paperossin, ja heittytyi
pehmelle sohvalle, joka oli vastapt varjostinta. Se oli vanha
varjostin kullatusta espanjalaisesta nahasta, jonka korkokoristeet
olivat pikemmin prameaa Ludvig XIV:nnen aikuista kuosia. Hn katseli
sit uteliaana, ihmetellen, tokko se koskaan ennen oli ktkenyt ihmisen
elmn salaisuutta.

Siirtisik hn sen sittenkin syrjn? Miksi se ei saisi seisoa
paikallaan? Mit hyty olisi varmuudesta? Jos se olisi totta, niin se
olisi hirve. Jos se ei ollut totta, niin mit siit kannatti
huolehtia? Mutta jos kohtalo tai sattuma sallisi, ett joku muu kuin hn
itse katsoisi varjostimen taakse ja huomaisi tuon hirven muutoksen?
Mitp hn tekisi jos Basil Hallward tulisi ja tahtoisi nhd
maalaamaansa kuvaa? Basil sit varmaan haluaisi. Ei; siit oli otettava
selkoa, ja heti paikalla. Kaikki muu oli parempaa kuin tm hirve
eptietoisuus.

Hn nousi yls ja sulki molemmat ovet. Ainakin hn tahtoi olla yksin
katselemassa tuota naamaria, joka kantoi hnen hpens leimaa. Sitten
hn siirsi varjostimen syrjn ja katseli itsen silmst silmn. Se
oli aivan totta. Muotokuva oli muuttunut.

Hn muisti usein jlkeenpin ja aina jonkunlaisella hmmstyksell, ett
hn ensin oli tarkastellut kuvaa melkein tieteellisell intressill.
Hnest tuntui aivan ksittmttmlt, ett sellainen muutos oli voinut
tapahtua. Ja kuitenkin se oli totta. Oliko olemassa salaista
yhdyssidett hnen sielunsa ja niiden kemiallisten alkuosien vlill,
joista kankaalla sukeutui muotoa ja vri? Voisiko olla mahdollista,
ett ne ilmitoisivat sielun ajatuksia? Vai oliko jokin hirvempi syy
olemassa? Hnt vrisytti ja hn tunsi pelkoa. Ja hn palasi takaisin
sohvalle ja katseli kuvaa makuulta sairaalloisen kauhun vallassa.

Jotakin kuitenkin tuo kuva oli saanut aikaan. Se oli herttnyt hness
selvn tiedon siit, ett hn oli kohdellut vrin ja julmasti Sibyl
Vanea. Mutta sit tekoa ei ollut myhist korjata. Hn voisi vielkin
tulla hnen vaimoksensa. Hnen eptodellinen ja itseks rakkautensa
saisi alistua korkeamman voiman alle, muuttua jalommaksi tunteeksi, ja
Basil Hallwardin maalaama kuva olisi hnelle ohjaajana kautta koko
elmn, olisi hnelle sit mit hurskaus tai omatunto on toisille ja
Jumalan pelko meille kaikille. Omantunnonvaivoja voi unilkkeill
parantaa ja rohdoilla tuudittaa uneen moraalisia tunteita. Mutta tss
oli synnist johtuvan kadotuksen nkyv vertauskuva. Se oli alituisena
merkkin siit turmeluksesta, jonka ihminen sielulleen saattaa.

Kello li kolme, nelj ja puolen tunninkin kaksinkertainen lynti
kajahti, mutta Dorian Gray ei liikahtanut. Hn koetti koota elmn
tulipunaiset langat yhteen ja kutoa niist kuvioita. Hn koetti lyt
tiet intohimojen veripunaisessa umpisokkelossa, jossa hn parhaallaan
vaelsi. Hn ei tiennyt mit tehd, mit ajatella. Vihdoin hn astui
pydn reen ja kirjoitti intohimoisen kirjeen tytlle, jota hn oli
rakastanut, rukoillen hnelt anteeksiantoa ja syytten itsen
hulluudesta. Hn tytti sivun toisensa jlkeen surun ja tuskan
eptoivoisilla sanoilla. On olemassa itsesyytksen ylellisyytt. Kun me
syytmme itsemme, niin meidn mielestmme ei kelln muulla ole
oikeutta syytt meit. Synnintunnustus antaa meille synninpstn, eik
pappi. Kun Dorian oli lopettanut kirjeens, niin hnest tuntui ett
kaikki oli annettu hnelle anteeksi.

kki kuului kolkutus ovelta ja hn kuuli lordi Henryn nen
ulkopuolella. "Rakas ystv, minun tytyy saada tavata sinua. Pst
minut heti sisn. En voi siet, ett sulkeudut tuolla tavalla."

Ensiksi hn ei vastannut mitn, vaan pysyi aivan hiljaa. Kolkutusta yh
jatkui ja se yltyi yh kovemmaksi. Niin, parasta olikin pst lordi
Henry sisn ja selitt hnelle, ett hn aikoi aloittaa uutta elm,
riidell hnen kanssaan, jos se oli vlttmtnt, rikkoa vlitkin, jos
sit ei voinut vltt. Hn hyppsi pystyyn, tynsi varjostimen nopeasti
kuvan eteen ja avasi oven.

"Olen kovin suruissani, Dorian", sanoi lordi Henry astuessaan sisn.
"Mutta l ajattele sit liiaksi".

"Tarkoitatko Sibyl Vanea?" kysyi nuorukainen.

"Tietysti", vastasi lordi Henry vajoten tuoliin ja veten hitaasti
keltaiset hansikkaat ksistn. "Tavallaanhan se oli hirve, mutta
eihn syy ollut sinun. Kerroppa, menitk tapaamaan hnt kulisien taakse
nytnnn loputtua?"

"Menin."

"Sen arvasinkin. Oliko sinulla ikv kohtaus hnen kanssaan?"

"Min olin trke, Harry -- kerrassaan trke. Mutta kaikki on nyt
hyvin. En ole pahoillani en mistn. Olen sen kautta oppinut itseni
paremmin tuntemaan".

"Oi, Dorian, olen niin iloinen, ett otat asian silt kannalta! Min
pelksin tapaavani sinut omantunnonvaivoissa, raastaen kauniita
kiharoitasi".

"Se on jo suoritettu", sanoi Dorian pudistaen ptn ja hymyillen. "Nyt
olen tysin onnellinen. Hyvksi aluksi olen oppinut mit omatunto on. Se
ei ole sit, mit sin olet opettanut. Se on se, mik meiss on
jumalallista. l nyrpist nensi, Harry -- l ainakaan minulle. Min
tahdon olla hyv. En voi siet, ett sieluni muuttuu inhottavaksi."

"Ihastuttavan taiteellinen pohja uudelle siveysopille, Dorian! Toivotan
sinulle onnea. Mutta miten aiot alottaa?"

"Naimalla Sibyl Vanen."

"Naimalla Sibyl Vanen!" huudahti lordi Henry hyphten pystyyn ja
katsoen hneen llistyneen. "Mutta rakas Dorian --".

"Niin, Harry, min tiedn mit aiot sanoa. Jotakin hirve avioliitosta.
l huoli sanoa sit. l puhu minulle en koskaan senkaltaisista
asioista. Kaksi piv sitten min kosin Sibylia. En aio rikkoa
lupaustani. Hnest tulee minun vaimoni."

"Sinun vaimosi! Dorian!... Etk saanut minun kirjettni? Min kirjoitin
sinulle tn aamuna, ja lhetin oman palvelijani kirjett viemn".

"Sinun kirjeesi? Aivan oikein, kyll muistan. En ole viel lukenut sit,
Harry. Pelksin, ett se sisltisi jotakin, joka ei olisi minulle
mieleen. Sin revit elmn pirstaleiksi epigrammeillasi".

"Sin et siis tied mitn?"

"Mit sin tarkoitat?"

Lordi Henry astui lattian yli, ja istahtaen Dorianin viereen, tarttui
hnen molempiin ksiins ja puristi niit lujasti. "Dorian", hn sanoi,
"minun kirjeeni -- l pelsty -- ilmoitti sinulle, ett Sibyl Vane on
kuollut."

Tuskan huuto psi nuorukaisen huulilta ja hn hyppsi pystyyn,
irroittaen ktens lordi Henryn puristuksesta. "Kuollut! Sibyl kuollut!
Se ei ole totta! Se on hirve valhe! Kuinka sin uskallat sellaista
sanoa?"

"Se on aivan totta, Dorian", sanoi lordi Henry vakavasti. "Se seisoo
kaikissa aamulehdiss. Min pyysin kirjeessni, ettet ottaisi ketn
vastaan ennenkuin min tulisin. Kuulustelu tulee tietysti pidettvksi,
mutta sinua ei saa sekoittaa siihen. Tuollaiset tapahtumat saattavat
miehen muotiin Parisissa. Mutta Lontoossa ihmisill on niin paljon
ennakkoluuloja. Tll ei kukaan voisi debyteerata skandalilla. Se on
sstettv vanhojen pivien varaksi huomion herttmist varten.
Eivthn he teatterissa tied sinun nimesi? Jolleivt tied, niin
kaikki on hyvin. Nkik kukaan kun menit hnen huoneesensa? Se on hyvin
trke kohta."

Dorian ei vastannut hetken aikaan. Hn oli aivan jykkn kauhusta.
Vihdoin hn sammalsi tukahdetulla nell: "Harry, sanoitko, ett
pidettisiin kuulustelua? Mit sin sill tarkoitat? Olisiko Sibyl? Oi,
Harry, en voi sit kest! Mutta puhu nopeasti. Kerro minulle kaikki
yht haavaa".

"Olen varma siit, ettei se ollut mikn tapaturma, Dorian, vaikka asia
on siten selitettv yleislle. Nytt silt kuin hn olisi lhtenyt
teatterista itins kanssa noin puoli yhden ajoissa ja tultuaan ulos
olisi sanonut unohtaneensa jotakin huoneesensa. He odottivat hnt
jonkun aikaa, mutta hnt ei kuulunut. Lopulta he lysivt hnet
makaamassa maassa pukuhuoneen lattialla. Hn oli juonut jotakin
ephuomiossa, jotakin hirve, jota teatterissa kytetn. En tied mit
se oli, mutta siin oli joko sinihappoa tai lyijyvalkeaa. Minun
luullakseni se oli sinihappoa, koska hn nytt heti heittneen
henkens".

"Harry, Harry, se on kauheaa!" huudahti nuorukainen.

"Tietysti se on hyvin traagillista, mutta l sekaannu koko juttuun.
_Standard'ista_ nin, ett hn oli seitsemntoista vanha. Min olisin
hnt luullut vielkin nuoremmaksi. Hn nytti niin lapsekkaalta, eik
tuntunut tietvn nyttelemisest mitn. Dorian, sin et saa antaa
tmn tapahtuman painostaa itsesi. Tule minun kanssani pivllisille,
ja pistydytn sitten myhemmin ooperassa. Tn iltana Patti esiintyy
ja kaikki menevt sinne. Voit tulla sisareni aitioon. Hnell on
seurassaan muutamia kauniita naisia."

"Min olen siis murhannut Sibyl Vanen", sanoi Dorian Gray puoleksi
itsekseen -- "murhannut hnet yht varmaan kuin jos olisin veitsell
leikannut hnen kurkkunsa. Mutta ruusut eivt silt ole vhemmn
suloisia. Linnut laulavat puutarhassa yht iloisesti kuin ennenkin. Ja
tn iltana min syn pivllist sinun kanssasi ja menen sitten
ooperaan, ja luultavasti sen jlkeen syn jossakin illallista. Miten
draamallinen elm on! Jos olisin lukenut kaikkea tt jostakin
kirjasta, Harry, niin se varmaan olisi liikuttanut minua kyyneliin
saakka. Mutta nyt, kun se todellakin on tapahtunut, ja vielp minulle
itselleni, niin on se liian ihmeellist, jotta voisin itke. Tss on
ensiminen intohimoinen rakkauskirjeeni, jota elissni olen
kirjoittanut. Kuinka kummallista, ett kirjoitin ensimisen intohimoisen
rakkauskirjeeni kuolleelle tytlle. Tokkopa he voivat tuntea, nuo
valkoiset, nettmt olennot, joita me kuolleiksi nimitmme? Sibyl!
Voiko hn tuntea, tiet ja kuulla? Oi, Harry, kuinka min hnt
rakastin! Tuntuu silt, kuin siit olisi jo vuosia kulunut. Hn oli
minulle kaikki kaikessa. Sitten seurasi tuo hirve ilta -- oliko se
todellakin eilis-ilta? -- jolloin hn nytteli niin kurjasti, ja minun
sydmeni aivan murtui. Hn selitti minulle syyn siihen. Hn teki sen
kovin pateetisesti. Mutta min en tuntenut vhintkn liikutusta. Min
arvelin ett hn oli pintapuolinen. kki tapahtui jotakin, joka saattoi
minut kauhun valtaan. En voi selitt sinulle mit se oli, mutta se oli
hirve. Min tahdoin palata takaisin hnen luoksensa. Tunsin tehneeni
vrin. Ja nyt hn on kuollut. Hyv Jumala! Hyv Jumala! Harry, mit
minun tulee tehd. Et tied mik vaara minua uhkaa, eik mikn voi
minua pelastaa. Hn olisi voinut pelastaa minut. Hnell ei ollut
oikeutta ottaa itsens hengilt. Se oli itsekst."

"Rakas Dorian", vastasi lordi Henry ottaen paperossin kotelosta ja
tarttuen kullattuun tulitikkulaatikkoon, "ainoa tapa mill nainen voi
parantaa miest on se, ett hn kiusaa hnt niin kauan, ett elm
tulee miehelle vastenmieliseksi. Jos olisit nainut tuon tytn, niin
olisit tullut onnettomaksi. Tietysti olisit kohdellut hnt
ystvllisesti. On niin helppo olla ystvllinen ihmisille, joista ei
vlit. Mutta hn olisi pian huomannut sinun vlinpitmttmyytesi. Ja
kun vaimo huomaa, ett mies ei hnt rakasta en, niin hn ei viitsi
pukeutua en hyvin, tai komeilee hatuissa, joita jonkun toisen vaimon
mies saa maksaa. En sano mitn siit yhteiskunnallisesta erehdyksest,
joka olisi ollut kerrassaan anteeksiantamatonta ja jota min tietysti en
koskaan olisi sallinut, mutta min vakuutan sinulle, ett koko juttu
joka tapauksessa olisi ollut hyvin onnistumaton."

"Luulenpa minkin", mutisi nuorukainen astuen edes-takaisin huoneessa.
Hn oli peloittavan kalpea. "Mutta min luulin sen velvollisuudekseni.
Ei se ole minun syyni, ett tuo hirve murhenytelm est minua
tyttmst aikomustani. Muistan sinun kerran sanoneen, ett onnettomuus
vainoo kaikkia hyvi aikomuksia -- ett ne aina tulevat liian myhn.
Siten on ainakin minun kynyt."

"Hyvt aikomukset ovat hydyttmi yrityksi, jotka hiritsevt
luonnonlakeja. Turhamaisuus on niiden alkulhde. Niiden tulos ei ole
kerrassaan mikn. Ne antavat meille silloin-tllin tuollaisia
ylellisi ja hedelmttmi mielenliikutuksia, joissa on viehtyst
viikon ajaksi. Muuta niist ei voi sanoa. Ne ovat aivan yksinkertaisesti
vain shekkej, joita mr pankin maksamaan, vaikkei omistakkaan siin
minknlaista tili."

"Harry", sanoi Dorian Gray astuen hnen luokseen ja istahtaen hnen
viereens, "mitenk on mahdollista, ettei tuo murhenytelm tee minuun
niin syv vaikutusta kuin tahtoisin? En usko olevani sydmetn.
Luuletko sin?"

"Olet tehnyt siksi monta hullutusta nin viimeisin kahtena viikkona,
ett sinulla on oikeus nimitt siten itsesi, Dorian" vastasi lordi
Henry suloisen alakuloisesti hymyillen.

Nuorukainen rypisti kulmiaan. "En pid tuosta selityksest, Harry", hn
vastasi, "mutta olen iloinen, etten sinun mielestsi ole sydmetn. Min
en todellakaan ole semmoinen. Min tiedn etten ole. Ja kuitenkin minun
tytyy tunnustaa, ett tm tapaus ei koske minuun niin kovasti kuin sen
pitisi. Se tuntuu minusta vain ihmeellisen nytelmn ihmeelliselt
lopulta. Se on yht hirvittvn ihana kuin kreikkalainen murhenytelm,
jossa min itse nyttelen trke osaa, mutta josta min suoriudun
haavoittumatta."

"Se on mieltkiinnittv kysymys", sanoi lordi Henry, jonka mielest oli
erinomaisen hauska leikitell nuorukaisen tiedottomalla itsekkisyydell
-- "erinomaisen mieltkiinnittv kysymys. Minun luullakseni oikea
selitys on tm. Usein sattuu, ett elmn todelliset murhenytelmt
loppuvat niin eptaiteellisella tavalla, ett ne loukkaavat meit
raa'alla trkeydelln, tydellisell epjohdonmukaisuudellaan ja
hirvell jrjettmyydelln ja tyylittmyydelln. Ne vaikuttavat
meihin aivan samalla tavalla kuin raaka vkivalta. Ne antavat meille
ksityksen elimellisest voimasta, ja me nousemme kapinaan sit
vastaan. Joskus kuitenkin me elmss kohtaamme murhenytelmn, jossa on
taiteellista kauneutta. Jos tuo taiteellinen kauneus on tosi, niin koko
tapaus viehtt meidn draamallista aistiamme. kki me huomaammekin,
ettemme olekkaan nyttelijit, vaan nytelmn katselijoita. Tai
pikemmin me olemme kumpaistakin. Me katselemme itsemme ja nytelmn
ihmeet hurmaavat meit. Mit oikeastaan on tapahtunut puheenaolevassa
tapauksessa? Joku on rakkaudesta sinuun tappanut itsens. Min
toivoisin, ett minullakin joskus olisi ollut sellainen kokemus. Se
olisi saattanut minut rakastumaan rakkauteen koko loppu-ikseni. Ne
ihmiset, jotka ovat ihailleet minua -- ei niit ole ollut monta, mutta
kuitenkin joitakuita -- ovat aina halunneet el edelleen, viel kauan
sen jlkeen kun olen lakannut heit rakastamasta, tai he rakastamasta
minua. He ovat tulleet lihaviksi ja ikviksi, ja kun min tapaan heit,
niin he heti alkavat puhua entisist muistoista. Kuinka hirve tuo
naisten muisti! Mik julma kapine se on! Ja millaista aivojen pyshdyst
se todistaa! Pitisi nauttia elmn vrikkyydest, mutta ei muistella
sen yksityiskohtia. Yksityiskohdat ovat aina alhaisia."

"Minun tytyy kylv unikkoja puutarhaani", huokasi Dorian.

"Ei se ole tarpeen", vastasi hnen ystvns. "Elmll on aina unikkoja
ksissn. Tietysti joskus tarvitaan pitkkin aikaa. Kerran min en
kyttnyt mitn muita kukkia kuin orvokkeja kokonaiseen kevtkauteen
jonkunmoisen taiteellisen surun merkkin ern rakkausjutun vuoksi, joka
ei tahtonut kuolla. Mutta vihdoin kuitenkin se kuoli. En muista en,
mik sen tappoi. Ehkp se, ett tytt tahtoi uhrata koko maailman minun
thteni. Se on aina julma hetki. Se hertt ihmisess koko
iankaikkisuuden kauhun. No niin -- voitkohan uskoa? -- viikkoa myhemmin
lady Hampshiren luona, min jouduin istumaan saman neiden viereen
pivllispydss, ja hn itsepisyydessn tahtoi ottaa esille koko
jutun, rupesi kaivelemaan entisyytt ja tekemn suunnitteluja
tulevaisuuden varalta. Min olin haudannut rakkauteni liljojen peittoon.
Hn raasti sen jlleen nkyviin ja vakuutti minulle, ett min olin
turmellut hnen elmns. Minun on pakko todistaa, ett hn si aimo
pivllisen, enk sen vuoksi voinut olla yhtn huolissani hnen
thtens. Mutta millaista mauttomuutta hn osoitti! Entisyyden ainoa
viehtys onkin juuri siin, ett se on mennytt. Mutta naiset eivt
koskaan ksit, milloin esirippu on langennut. He haluavat aina kuudetta
nytst, ja juuri kun kappale on kadottanut kaiken mielenkiinnon, he
tahtoisivat sit jatkaa. Jos he saisivat mrt, niin jokainen
huvinytelm loppuisi traagillisesti ja jokainen murhenytelm muuttuisi
farssiksi. He ovat ihastuttavan taiteellisia, mutta heill ei ole
taideaistia. Sin olet onnellisempi kuin min. Min vakuutan sinulle,
Dorian, ettei yksikn nainen, jonka min olen tuntenut, olisi tehnyt
minun thteni sit, mit Sibyl Vane teki. Tavalliset naiset aina
lohduttuvat. Muutamat tekevt sen kyttmll hempemielisi vrej. l
koskaan luota naiseen, joka kytt sinipunertavia vrej, olkoon hn
mink ikinen hyvns, tai viisineljtt ikvuotta tyttneesen naiseen,
joka pit vaaleanpunaisista nauhoista. Se merkitsee aina, ett heill
jo on entisyytt. Toiset tuntevat suurta lohdutusta kun he kki ovat
huomaavinaan hyvi ominaisuuksia miehissns. He kehuvat kaikille
kotionneaan, iknkuin se olisi hurmaavin kaikista synneist. Toiset
lytvt lohdutuksensa uskonnossa. Sen salaperisyyksill on sama
viehtys kuin kurtiisilla, vakuutti ers nainen kerta; ja min voin sen
tydellisesti ymmrt. Sit paitsi ei mikn kutkuta meidn
turhamaisuuttamme niin suuressa mrin kuin se, jos meit sanotaan
syntisiksi. Omatunto tekee meist kaikista egoisteja. Niin; ei
todellakaan ole loppua niill lohdutuksen keinoilla, joita nainen
nykyn voi lyt. Tosiaankin, en ole edes maininnut kaikista
trkeint."

"Mik se on, Harry!" sanoi nuorukainen vlinpitmttmsti.

"Oi, kaikkein helpoin lohdutus. Otetaan jonkun toisen ihailija, kun on
kadottanut omansa. Seuraelmss nainen siten aina puhdistuu. Mutta
tosiaankin, Dorian, miten erilainen Sibyl Vane mahtoikaan olla kuin
kaikki muut naiset! Hnen kuolemansa on minun mielestni niin ihmeen
kaunis. Olen iloinen, ett eln aikakaudessa, jolloin sellaisia ihmeit
voi tapahtua. Ne saattavat meit uskomaan, ett todellakin on olemassa
sellaista kuin romantiikkaa, intohimoa ja rakkautta, joilla me olemme
niin valmiit leikittelemn."

"Min kohtelin hnt hirven julmasti. Sen sin unohdat!"

"Minp luulen, ett naiset asettavat julmuuden, suorastaan julmuuden
korkeammalle kuin mitn muuta. Heill on ihmeellisen alkuperiset
vaistot. Me olemme vapauttaneet heidt, mutta sittenkin he pysyvt
orjina, jotka palvelevat herrojansa. He tahtovat olla kskynalaisia.
Olen varma siit, ett sin olit suurenmoinen. En ole koskaan nhnyt
sinua oikein todellisesti suuttuneena, mutta min voin kuvailla
mielessni, kuinka ihanalta sin nytit. Ja sit paitsi sin sanoit
minulle jotakin toissapivn, joka tuntui minusta kovin haaveilevalta,
mutta jonka nyt huomaan aivan todeksi ja joka on avaimena kaikkeen
muuhunkin."

"Mit se oli, Harry?"

"Sin sanoit, ett Sibyl Vane edusti sinulle kaikkia runouden
sankarittaria -- ett hn yhten iltana oli Desdemona, toisena Ofelia;
ja jos hn kuoli Juliana, niin hn hersi jlleen henkiin Imogenena."

"Mutta nyt hn ei koskaan en her henkiin", mutisi nuorukainen,
ktkien kasvot ksiins.

"Ei, hn ei en her henkiin. Hn on nytellyt viimeisen osansa. Mutta
sinun tytyy ajatella hnen kuolemaansa synkn pukuhuoneen
hiljaisuudessa iknkuin se olisi jokin tavaton, hirve murhenytelmn
katkelma kuningas Jakobin ajoilta tai ihana nyts Websterin, Fordin tai
Cyril Tourneurin nytelmiss. Tytt ei elnyt koskaan todellisuudessa,
ja siis hn ei ole koskaan todellisesti kuollutkaan. Sinulle ainakin hn
oli vain unelma, haavekuva, joka liiteli Shakespearen nytelmiss,
sulostutti niit lsnolonsa kautta -- paimenhuilu, jonka vlityksell
Shakespearen svelet kajahtivat vain rikkaampina ja riemullisempina.
Samassa hetkess kuin hn joutui todellisen elmn yhteyteen, hn
hmmensi sen, ja se huumasi hnet, ja hn lksi pois. Sure Ofeliaa, jos
tahdot. Sirota tuhkaa hiuksiisi sen vuoksi, ett Cordelia kuristettiin.
Kiroa taivasta siksi ett Brabantin tytr kuoli. Mutta l hukkaa
kyyneleitsi Sibyl Vanen thden. Hn oli vhemmn todellinen kuin nuo
toiset."

Oli hetken hiljaisuus. Ilta alkoi hmrt huoneessa. neti,
hopeahelmoin varjot hiipivt puutarhasta sisn. Esineiden vrit
alkoivat valjeta.

Jonkun ajan kuluttua Dorian Gray katsahti yls. "Sin olet selvittnyt
minulle oman itseni, Harry", hn mutisi jonkunmoisella helpoituksen
huojennuksella. "Min tunsin kaiken sen mink olet sanonut, mutta olin
peloissani enk uskaltanut antaa sille ilmaisumuotoa. Kuinka hyvin sin
tunnet minut! Mutta ei huolita puhua en siit mik on tapahtunut. Se
on ollut ihmeellinen kokemus. Siin kaikki. Saa nhd, voiko elm
tarjota minulle en mitn ihmeellist."

"Elm voi tarjota sinulle mit hyvns, Dorian. Ei ole mitn, mit
sin et voisi toteuttaa tavattomalla kauneudellasi."

"Mutta ajattelehan, Harry, jos min tulen rumaksi, vanhaksi ja
ryppyiseksi? Mit sitten?"

"Ah, sitten", sanoi lordi Henry nousten lhteksens -- "sitten, rakas
Dorian, sinun tytyy taistella saavuttaaksesi voittoja. Nyt voitot
tulevat suoraan sinun syliisi. Ei, sinun tytyy silytt kaunis
ulkomuotosi. Me elmme ajassa, joka lukee liiaksi ollakseen viisas, ja
ajattelee liiaksi ollakseen kaunis. Me emme tule toimeen ilman sinua. Ja
nyt olisi parasta, jos pukeutuisit ja tulisit mukaan klubiin. Me tulemme
sittenkin hiukan myhn."

"Min luulen parhaaksi, ett tapaamme toisemme vasta ooperassa, Harry.
Olen liian vsynyt voidakseni syd jotakin. Mik on sisaresi aition
numero?"

"Kaksikymmentseitsemn, luullakseni. Se on ensimisell parvella. Hnen
nimens on ovella. Mutta minusta on ikv, ettet tule symn."

"Ei minulla ole halua", sanoi Dorian vlinpitmttmsti. "Mutta olen
sinulle hyvin kiitollinen kaikesta siit, mink minulle olet sanonut.
Sin olet minun rakkain ystvni. Ei kukaan ole ymmrtnyt minua niin
hyvin kuin sin."

"Meidn ystvyytemme on vasta alulla, Dorian", vastasi lordi Henry
pudistaen hnen kttns. "Hyvsti. Toivottavasti nen sinut puoli
kymmenelt. Muista, Patti laulaa."

Kun ovi sulkeutui hnen jlkeens, niin Dorian Gray soitti kelloa, ja
hetken kuluttua Viktor toi lamput sisn ja veti uutimet alas. Dorian
odotti krsimttmsti hnen poistumistansa. Mies nytti tarvitsevan
hirven paljo aikaa kaikkeen.

Heti kun hn oli poistunut, niin Dorian syksi varjostimen luo ja veti
sen syrjn. Ei, kuva ei ollut muuttunut entistn enemmn. Se oli
saanut tiedon Sibyl Vanen kuolemasta ennenkuin hn itse. Elmn
salaisuudet selvisivt sille samassa hetkess kuin ne tapahtuivatkin.
Hirve julmuuden ilme, joka vristi suun hienoja piirteit, oli
varmaankin ilmaantunut samana hetken, jolloin tytt oli juonut myrkky.
Vai oliko se vlinpitmtn ulkonaisille tapahtumille? Oliko sill vain
selkoa siit, mik sielussa liikkui? Dorian mietti ja toivoi, ett hn
kerran saisi omin silmin nhd tuon muutoksen tapahtuvan, ja hnt
vrisytti sit toivoessansa.

Sibyl parka! Mik ihmeellinen tapaus se oli ollut! Hn oli usein
nytellyt kuolevaa nyttmll. Sitten itse kuolema oli kosketellut
hnt ja vienyt hnet mukanansa. Miten Sibyl oli nytellyt tuota
viimeist julmaa kohtausta? Oliko hn kironnut hnet kuollessansa? Ei,
Sibyl oli kuollut rakkaudesta hneen, ja rakkaus tulisi nyt aina olemaan
hnelle pyh kuin sakramentti. Sibyl oli sovittanut kaikki uhraamalla
oman elmns. Hn ei tahtonut en muistella niit krsimyksi, joita
hnen oli tytynyt kest Sibylin thden tuona hirven iltana
teatterissa. Nyt kun hn ajatteli Sibylia, niin tm oli hnest
iknkuin ihmeellinen, traagillinen henkil, joka oli lhetetty maailman
nyttmlle esittmn rakkauden ylev todellisuutta. Ihmeellinen,
traagillinen olentoko? Kyyneleet kohosivat hnen silmiins
muistellessaan hnen lapsekasta katsettaan, hempe, suloista olentoaan
ja arkaa, pelokasta esiintymistn. Hn pyyhki ne nopeasti pois ja
katseli jlleen kuvaa.

Hn tunsi valitsemisen hetken nyt tulleen. Vai oliko hn jo tehnyt
valintansa? Niin, elm oli hnen puolestaan valinnut -- elm, ja hnen
oma kiihke halunsa saada tuntea elm. Ikuisen nuoruuden ikuiset
intohimot, herkulliset ja salaiset nautinnot, hurjat huvit ja viel
hurjemmat synnit -- kaiken tuon hn saisi omakseen. Kuva yksin kantaisi
hnen hpens taakkaa: siin kaikki.

Tuskan tunne valtasi hnet ajatellessaan sit hvityst,
joka kohtaisi kaunista muotokuvaa. Kerran hn poikamaisessa
narcissusturhamaisuudessaan oli suudellut, tai ollut suutelevinaan noita
maalattuja huulia, jotka nyt niin katkerasti hymyilivt hnelle. Aamun
toisensa jlkeen hn oli istunut kuvan edess ja ihaillut sen kauneutta,
aivan rakastuneena siihen, niinkuin hnest joskus tuntui. Muuttuisiko
se nyt jokaisen hnen tunnelmansa mukaan? Tulisiko se kauheaksi ja
inhottavaksi, jotta se oli piiloitettava suljettuun huoneesen, salattava
auringon valolta, joka niin usein oli muuttanut sen soljuvat suortuvat
kimaltelevaksi kullaksi!

Hetken aikaa hn aikoi rukoilla, ett tuo kauhistuttava side, joka oli
olemassa kuvan ja hnen vlillns, lakkaisi. Se oli muuttunut hartaan
toivomuksen johdosta, ehkp harras toivomus voisi peruuttaa edellisen
toivomuksen. Ja sittenkin, kukahan, joka hiukankin tunsi elm,
kieltytyisi siit onnesta, ett saisi pysy alati nuorena, vaikka tuo
onni olisi kuinkakin eriskummainen ja sen seuraukset kuinka kovia
tahansa? Mutta oliko se hnen itsens mrttviss? Oliko hnen
toivomuksensa todellakin saanut aikaan tuon muutoksen? Eikhn joku
kummallinen tieteellinen syy voinut sit vaikuttaa? Jos ajatus saattoi
vaikuttaa elvn organismiin, niin eik ajatus saattanut vaikuttaa mys
kuolleihin, eporgaanisiin esineihin? Niin, miksik ei meit ymprivt
esineet voisi tietmtt ja ilman tajullista toivetta, vrhdell
sopusoinnussa meidn mielialojemme ja intohimojemme kanssa, siten ett
atomit vetisivt puoleensa atomeja salaisen rakkauden tai ihmeellisen
ystvyyden valtaamina? Mit merkityst itse vaikuttimilla oli? Hn ei
en koskaan yrittisi rukouksella koetella hirve voimaa. Jos kuva
muuttuu, niin se muuttuu. Siin kaikki. Mit sit kannattaisi sen
enemmn sureksia?

Hyvin huvittavaa pinvastoin olisi tehd siit huomioita. Hn saattaisi
seurata omaa mielialaansa sen salaisimpiinkin sokkeloihin. Tm
muotokuva olisi kuin taikapeili. Samalla tavalla kuin se oli paljastanut
hnelle hnen ulkonaisen muotonsa, se paljastaisi hnelle hnen
sielunsakin. Ja kun kuvalle tulisi talven aika, niin hn itse olisi
ehtinyt vasta sinne, miss kevt vrhdellen odottaa kesn tuloa. Kun
puna oli kadonnut sen poskista ja jljelle oli jnyt vain kalkinkalpea
naamari ja lyijynraskaat silmt, niin hn itse olisi viel nuoruuden
loistossaan. Ei yksikn hnen kauneutensa kukka kuihtuisi. Hnen
elmnvaltasuonensa ei koskaan heikontuisi. Hn pysyisi voimakkaana,
joustavana ja iloisena aivan kuin kreikkalaisten jumalat. Mitp hn
vlitti tuon kankaalle maalatun kuvan kohtalosta? Hn itse olisi
turvattu. Se oli pasia.

Hn asetti varjostimen entiselle paikalleen kuvan eteen, ja hymyili.
Sitten hn meni makuuhuoneesen, jossa hnen kamaripalvelijansa jo hnt
odotti. Tuntia myhemmin hn oli ooperassa, ja lordi Henry nojautui
hnen tuolinsa yli.




LUKU IX.


Istuessaan aamiaispydss seuraavana pivn Basil Hallward astui
sisn.

"Olen niin iloinen, ett tapasin sinut kotona, Dorian", hn sanoi
vakavasti. "Kvin tll eilen illalla ja minulle sanottiin ett olit
ooperassa. Tietysti min tiesin, ett se oli mahdotonta. Mutta min
olisin toivonut, ett olisit ilmoittanut, minne todellakin olit mennyt.
Min vietin hirven illan, puoleksi pelten, ett toinen murhenytelm
voisi seurata toista. Minun mielestni olisit voinut shktt minulle,
kun sait tiet asian. Min luin sen aivan sattumalta Globen viimeisest
numerosta, joka klubissa osui kteeni. Tulin heti tnne, ja olin
tuskissani, kun en tavannut sinua. En voi sanoa sinulle, miten kipesti
tuo asia on koskenut minuun. Min ymmrrn kuinka julmasti sin krsit.
Mutta miss sin olit? Menitk tapaamaan tytt paran iti? Hetken
ajattelin menn sinua sielt hakemaan. Osoite oli lehdess. Jossakin
Euston roadin varrella, eik niin? Mutta min pelksin hiritsevni
surua, jota en kuitenkaan voinut kevent. Vaimo parka! Millaisessa
mielentilassa hn lienee! Ja hnen ainoa lapsensa! Mit hn sanoi
siit?"

"Rakas Basil, kuinka min voisin tiet?" mutisi Dorian Gray maistellen
kellertv viini hienosta, kullalla silatusta, kellomaisesta,
venetsialaisesta lasista ja nytten hyvin kiusaantuneelta. "Min olin
ooperassa. Sinun olisi pitnyt tulla sinne. Tapasin ensi kertaa lady
Gwendolenin, Harryn sisaren. Me istuimme hnen aitiossansa. Hn on
kerrassaan ihastuttava, ja Patti lauloi jumalallisesti. l puhu
kauhistuttavista asioista. Jollei puhu jostakin, niin se ei ole koskaan
tapahtunutkaan. Vain sanat tekevt asiat todellisiksi, niinkuin Harry
sanoo. Mutta Sibyl ei ollut tuon vaimon ainoa lapsi. Hnell on
poikakin, hauska poika luullakseni. Mutta hn ei ole nyttelij. Hn on
merimies, tai jotain sen tapaista. Ja nyt, kerro itsestsi ja mit sin
maalaat."

"Menitk sin ooperaan?" sanoi Hallward hyvin hitaasti, ness hillityn
surun svy. "Sin menit ooperaan, vaikka Sibyl Vane makasi kuolleena
jossakin likaisessa loukossa? Sin voit puhua minulle muista
ihastuttavista naisista ja Pattin jumalallisesta laulusta, ennenkuin
tytt, jota sin rakastit, on pssyt haudan rauhaan ja lepoon?
Tiedpps, sin veikkonen, ett hnen pieni, valkoinen ruumiinsa saa
kest viel monta kauheutta."

"l puhu, Basil! Min en tahdo kuulla!" huudahti Dorian hypten
pystyyn. "l puhu minulle tuosta asiasta. Se mik on tapahtunut, on
tapahtunut. Mik on mennytt, on mennytt."

"Sin sanot eilist piv menneisyydeksi?"

"Mit se liikuttaa todellista ajankulkua? Vain typert ihmiset
tarvitsevat vuosikausia voidakseen irtautua mielenliikutuksistaan. Mies,
joka hallitsee itsens, voi tehd lopun surusta yht helposti kuin
keksi jonkun huvin. Min en tahdo olla tunteitteni orja. Min tahdon
kytt niit, iloita niist ja hallita niit."

"Dorian, tm on julmaa! Sinussa on tapahtunut tydellinen muutos.
Ulkomuodoltasi olet aivan sama ihmeellinen poika, jolla oli tapana
pivn toisensa jlkeen tulla minun atelieriini ja istua mallinani.
Mutta silloin sin olit yksinkertainen, luonnollinen ja
teeskentelemtn. Sin olit kaikkein vhimmin pilattu olento koko
maailmassa. Sin puhut iknkuin olisit sydnt ja sli vailla. Se on
kokonaan Harryn vaikutusta. Sen min nyt nen."

Nuorukainen punastui ja astui ikkunan luo katsellen hetken aikaa
vihre, lehahtelevaa, auringon paahtamaa puutarhaa. "Min olen suuressa
kiitollisuuden velassa Harrylle, Basil", hn sanoi vihdoin --
"suuremmassa velassa kuin sinulle. Sin opetit minulle vain
turhamaisuutta."

"No niin, olen saanut siit rangaistukseni, Dorian -- tai saan sen
ainakin kerran."

"En ymmrr, mit sin tarkoitat, Basil", hn huudahti kntyen ympri.
"En ymmrr, mit sin tahdot. Mit sin tahdot?"

"Min tahtoisin saada takaisin sen Dorian Grayn, jota min ennen
maalasin", sanoi taiteilija surunvoittoisesti.

"Basil", sanoi nuorukainen astuen hnen luokseen ja laskien ktens
hnen olkaplleen, "sin olet tullut liian myhn. Eilen kun kuulin,
ett Sibyl Vane oli tappanut itsens --"

"Tappanutko itsens? Hyv Jumala, onko se totta?" huudahti Hallward
katsoen hneen kauhun vallassa.

"Rakas Basil! Et suinkaan sin luule sit tavalliseksi onnettomuudeksi?
Tietysti hn teki itsemurhan."

Vanhempi mies peitti kasvonsa ksiins. "Kuinka hirve", hn mutisi ja
vristys kulki hnen ruumiinsa lpi.

"Ei", sanoi Dorian Gray, "ei se ole hirve. Se on vain meidn
aikakautemme suurimpia romantisia murhenytelmi. Tavallisesti
nyttelijt viettvt kaikkein jokapivisint elm. He ovat hyvi
aviomiehi tai uskollisia vaimoja tai yleens jotakin ikv. Sin
tiedt, mit min tarkoitan -- keskiluokan hyveit ja kaikkea sen
kaltaista. Kuinka erilainen Sibyl oli! Hn eli ihanimman
murhenytelmns. Hn oli aina sankaritar. Viimeisen iltana, jolloin
hn nytteli -- sin iltana, jolloin sin nit hnet -- hn nytteli
huonosti senthden ett hn itse oli saanut kokea todellista rakkautta.
Kun hn huomasi, ettei se ollutkaan todellista, niin hn kuoli, samoin
kuin Julia olisi tehnyt. Hn palasi jlleen taiteen ilmakehn. Hn oli
tavallaan marttyyri. Hnen kuolemassaan ilmeni marttyriuden pateetista
hydyttmyytt ja hivuttavaa ihanuutta. Mutta, niinkuin jo sinulle
sanoin, sinun ei pid luulla etten min olisi krsinyt. Jos sin olisit
tullut eilen oikeaan aikaan -- noin puolikuudelta, tai neljnnest
vailla kuusi -- niin olisit tavannut minut kyyneliss. Ei Harrykaan,
joka oli tll ja toi minulle tuon sanoman, voinut aavistaakkaan kuinka
min krsin. Min krsin kauheasti. Sitten tuska katosi. En voi kahdesti
tuntea samalla tavalla. Ei kukaan muu sit voi paitsi hempemieliset
ihmiset. Ja sin olet kovin kohtuuton, Basil. Sin tulet tnne
lohduttamaan. Sehn on hyvin kaunista sinun puoleltasi. Mutta sin
huomaatkin, etten ole en lohdutuksen tarpeessa, ja sin raivostut. Se
on aivan ihmisystvllisen ihmisen tapaista. Sin palautat mieleeni
ern jutun, jonka Harry kertoi minulle erst filantropista, joka
kokonaista kaksikymment vuotta koetti hyvitt jotakin vryytt tai
muuttaa jotakin vr -- en oikein en muista mit se oli. Vihdoin se
hnelle onnistuikin, mutta samassa myskin hn tunsi suurta pettymyst.
Hnell ei ollut en mitn tekemist, hn kuoli suorastaan ikvst ja
muuttui parantumattomaksi ihmisvihaajaksi. Ja sit paitsi, rakas, vanha
Basil, jos todellakin tahdot lohduttaa minua, niin koeta mielemmin saada
minut unohtamaan se, mik on tapahtunut tai nkemn sit vain puhtaasti
taiteelliselta kannalta. Gautierko vai kukahan se lie kirjoittanut
kirjan _de la consolation des arts_ [Taiteitten lohdutuksesta]? Muistan
kerran lytneeni sinun kirjastostasi ern pienen pergamenttikantisen
kirjan, jossa nuo ihmeelliset sanat seisoivat. No niin, min en ole
samaa mielt kuin tuo nuori mies, josta sin kerroit minulle ollessamme
yhdess Marlowin luona, ja joka vitti ett keltainen silkki voi
lohduttaa ihmist kaikissa elmn suruissa. Min rakastan kaikkea
kaunista, jota voi pidell ja kosketella. Vanhoja brokadeja, viheriit
bronsseja, lakeeritit, veistetty norsunluuta, kauniita ympristj,
ylellisyytt, komeutta, kaikki nuo vaikuttavat minuun syvsti. Mutta
vielkin enemmn merkitsee minulle se taiteellinen temperamentti, jota
nuo esineet luovat, tai ainakin kehittvt. Jos tahtoo sivulta pin
tarkastaa omaa elmns, niin tulee, niinkuin Harry sanoo, vltt
elmn taisteluja. Min tiedn ett tuo minun puheeni ihmetytt sinua.
Sin et ole huomannut, miten min olen kehittynyt. Min olin vain
koulupoika, kun sin tutustuit minuun. Nyt min olen tysi mies. Minussa
on hernnyt uusia intohimoja, uusia ajatuksia ja uusia aatteita. Min
olen nyt toinen, mutta sinun tytyy pit minusta sittenkin. Min olen
muuttunut, mutta sinun tytyy aina olla minun ystvni. Tietysti min
olen hyvin kiintynyt Harryyn. Mutta min tiedn ett sin olet
luonteeltasi parempi kuin hn. Sin et ole voimakkaampi -- sin pelkt
liiaksi elm -- mutta sin olet parempi. Ja kuinka onnellisia me
olimme yhdess! l hylk minua, Basil, lk moiti minua. Min olen se
mik min olen. Siit ei voi sen enemp sanoa."

Maalari tunsi syv liikutusta. Nuorukainen oli hnelle hyvin rakas, ja
hnen personallisuutensa oli vaikuttanut suuren knnksen hnen
taiteessansa. Hn ei voinut siet sit ajatustakaan, ett hn viel
moittisi hnt. Hnen vlinpitmttmyytens oli varmaan vain ohimenev
oikku. Hness oli niin paljon hyv, niin paljon jaloa.

"No niin, Dorian", sanoi hn vihdoin surullisesti hymyillen, "en tahdo
tmn jlkeen puhua sinulle en tst hirvest tapahtumasta. Min
toivon vain, ettei sinun nimesi sekoiteta sen yhteyteen. Tnn
iltapuolella pidetn kuulustelua. Onko sinua kutsuttu siihen?"

Dorian pudisti ptn ja hnen kasvoihinsa ilmestyi kiusaantunut ilme,
kun hn kuuli sanan "kuulustelu." Kaikki sellainen oli niin raakaa ja
trke.

"He eivt tunne minun nimeni", hn vastasi.

"Eik tyttkn tiennyt?"

"Ainoastaan ristinimeni, ja olen aivan varma siit, ettei hn sit
koskaan maininnut kellekn. Hn sanoi kerta, ett kaikki olivat kovin
uteliaat tietmn, kuka min olin, ja ett hn aina nimitti minua vain
satuprinssiksi. Siin hn teki hyvin kauniisti. Sinun pitisi piirt
minulle Sibylin kuva, Basil. Tahtoisin mielellni, ett omistaisin
hnest jotakin muutakin kuin vain muiston muutamista suudelmista ja
katkonaisista, intomielisist sanoista."

"Koetan parastani, Dorian, jos se tuottaa sinulle iloa. Mutta min
tahtoisin maalata taas sinutkin. Tyni ei edisty ilman sinua."

"En voi koskaan en olla sinun mallinasi, Basil. Aivan mahdotonta!" hn
huudahti perytyen taakse.

Maalari katsoi hneen ihmeissns.

"Rakas ystv, mit mielettmyyksi sin puhut!" hn huudahti.
"Tarkoitatko ettei minun maalaukseni miellyt sinua? Miss se on? Miksi
olet asettanut varjostimen sen eteen? Anna minun katsella sit. Se on
minun paras tyni. Ota varjostin pois, Dorian. Miten hvytnt, ett
sinun palvelijasi on peittnyt minun maalaukseni tuolla tavalla. Koko
huone nytti niin oudolta kun tulin sisn."

"Minun palvelijallani ei ole mitn tekemist sen kanssa, Basil.
Luuletko sin, ett antaisin hnen jrjest minun huonettani? Joskus
hn hoitaa minun kukkiani -- siin kaikki. Ei, min tein sen itse. Valo
oli liian voimakas kuvalle."

"Liianko voimakas! Mahdotonta, hyv ystv. Paikka on erinomainen. Annas
kun katson." Ja Hallward astui huoneen nurkkausta kohti.

Dorian Grayn huulilta psi kauhun huudahtus, ja hn hykksi maalarin
ja varjostimen vliin. "Basil", hn sanoi aivan kalpeana, "l katsele
sit. Min en tahdo."

"Enk saisi katsoa omaa tytni! Ethn lie tosissasi. Miksi en saisi
sit katsella?" huudahti Hallward nauraen.

"Jos yritt katsoa sit, Basil, niin, kunniani kautta, en koskaan puhu
sinulle en sanaakaan. Olen aivan tosissani. Min en anna sinulle
minknlaista selityst, etk sin saa mitn kysykkn. Mutta muista,
jos kosket tuohon varjostimeen, niin meidn vlimme ovat lopussa."

Hallward oli kuin ukkosen-iskem. Hn katsoi hmmstyneen Dorian
Grayhin. Hn ei ollut koskaan ennen nhnyt hnt tllaisena. Nuorukainen
oli aivan kalpea vihasta. Hnen ktens olivat nyrkiss ja hnen
silmterns loistivat kuin siniset tulipyrt. Hn vapisi koko
ruumiissaan.

"Dorian!"

"l puhu!"

"Mutta mit se merkitsee? Tietysti en tahdo katsella sit, jos et sin
halua", hn sanoi kylmsti knnhten kantaplln ja astuen suoraan
ikkunan luo. "Mutta totta tosiaan, tuntuuhan se melkein mielettmlt,
etten min saisi katsella omaa tytni, varsinkin kun aion asettaa sen
ensi syksyn Parisissa nytteille. Luultavasti minun tytyy vernissata
se sit ennen, ja tytyyhn minun siis joka tapauksessa saada se nhd,
miksik ei siis yht hyvin jo tnn."

"Panna nytteillek! Tahdotko asettaa sen nytteille?" huudahti Dorian
Gray joutuen omituisen kauhun valtaan. Saisiko maailma nhd hnen
salaisuutensa? Saisivatko ihmiset llistell hnen elmns mysteriota?
Se oli mahdotonta. Jotakin -- hn ei tiennyt itse mit -- oli heti
paikalla tehtv.

"Niin, ei sinulla suinkaan ole mitn sit vastaan. Georges Petit aikoo
koota kaikki minun parhaat tauluni erikoisnyttely varten Rue de Szen
varrelle, joka avataan lokakuun alkuviikolla. Kuva on vain kuukauden
pivt poissa. Sen aikaa sin voit hyvinkin olla ilman sit, eik totta.
Sit paitsi olet varmaan silloin poissa kaupungistakin. Ja jos pidt
sit aina varjostimen peitossa, niin et taida siit suuriakaan
vlitt."

Dorian Gray siveli kdell otsaansa. Siin oli hikipisaria. Hn tunsi
olevansa hirven vaaran partaalla. "Kuukausi sitten sanoit minulle,
ettet koskaan asettaisi sit nytteille", sanoi hn. "Miksi olet
muuttanut mieltsi? Ihmiset, jotka vittvt olevansa johdonmukaisia,
ovat yht oikullisia kuin muutkin. Ainoa ero on siin, ett heidn
oikkunsa ovat aivan jrjettmi. Et suinkaan ole unohtanut, miten sin
vakuutit minulle aivan juhlallisesti, ettet mistn hinnasta maailmassa
asettaisi sit nytteille. Sin sanoit aivan samaa Harryllekin." Hn
vaikeni kki ja valo vlhti hnen silmiins. Hn muisti lordi Henryn
sanoneen hnelle kerran, puoleksi vakavasti, puoleksi leikill: "jos
haluat saada hupaisan hetken, niin pyyd Basilia kertomaan sinulle,
miksei hn tahdo asettaa kuvaasi nytteille. Hn kertoi sen minulle, ja
se oli koko ylltys." Niin, ehkp Basilillakin oli oma salaisuutensa.
Hnp koettaisi kysell.

"Basil", hn sanoi astuen aivan lhelle hnt ja katsoen hnt suoraan
silmiin, "meill kummallakin on salaisuutemme. Kerro sin omasi minulle,
niin minkin kerron sinulle. Miksi et tahtonut asettaa kuvaani
nytteille?"

Maalari vrisi tahtomattansa. "Dorian, jos kertoisin sen sinulle, niin
pitisit minusta vhemmn kuin nyt ja varmaan pilkkaisit minua. Sit en
voisi kest. Jollet salli minun katsella kuvaasi, niin tyydyn siihen.
Saanhan aina katsella sinua. Jos tahdot est maailmaa nkemst parasta
teostani, mit koskaan olen luonut, niin tyydyn siihen. Sinun
ystvyytesi on minulle kalliimpi kuin kaikki kunnia ja arvo."

"Ei, Basil, kerro minulle", intti Dorian Gray. "Minulla luullakseni on
oikeus sit tiet." Hnen kauhuntunteensa oli kadonnut ja uteliaisuus
tullut sijaan. Hn oli pttnyt ottaa selville Basil Hallwardin
salaisuuden.

"Kydn istumaan, Dorian", sanoi maalari nytten kiusaantuneelta.
"Istutaan hetkeksi. Ja vastaa minulle vain yhteen ainoaan kysymykseen.
Oletko huomannut kuvassa jotakin omituista -- jotakin, joka ehk ei heti
pistnyt sinun silmsi, mutta joka kki kvi sinulle selvksi?"

"Basil!" huudahti nuorukainen tarttuen vapisevin ksin kiinni tuolinsa
ksinojiin ja luoden hneen hurjat, kauhistuneet silmns.

"Min nen, ett olet sen huomannut. l puhu. Odota, kunnes olet
kuullut mit minulla on sanottavaa. Dorian, siit hetkest alkain,
jolloin tapasin sinut, sinun personallisuutesi vaikutti ihmeellisesti
minuun. Sin valtasit minut kokonaan, minun sieluni, aivoni ja voimani.
Sin merkitsit minulle sen nkymttmn ideaalin ruumistumista, joka
kummittelee meidn taiteilijoiden mieless kuin ihanan unelman muisto.
Min jumaloin sinua. Min kadehdin joka ainoaa joka puhutteli sinua.
Min tahdoin pit sinut vain omanani. Olin onnellinen vain silloin kun
olin sinun seurassasi. Silloinkin kun olit poissa, olit lsn
taiteessani... Tietysti en koskaan antanut sinun aavistaa tt kaikkea.
Sehn olisi ollut mahdotonta. Ethn sin olisi sit ymmrtnyt. Tuskin
ymmrsin sit itsekn. Min tiesin vain, ett olin katsonut
tydellisyytt kasvoista kasvoihin ja ett maailma minun silmissni oli
muuttunut ihanaksi -- liian ihanaksi ehk, sill tuollaisessa
mielettmss jumaloimisessa piilee vaara, sek kadottamisen ett
silyttmisen vaara... Kului viikko viikolta ja min jouduin yh enemmn
sinun tenhosi valtaan. Sitten seurasi uusi kehitys. Olin maalannut sinut
Pariksena loistavassa sotasovassa, ja Adoniksena metsmiehen puvussa,
kiiltv metssian keihs olalla. Sin istuit lotuskukkaseppele kutrilla
Hadrianuksen purren kokassa ja thystelit yli vihertvn, mutaisen
Niilin. Sin kumarruit yksinisen lhteen reunan yli kreikkalaisen
metsn siimeksess, ja katselit omien kasvojesi ihanuutta veden
kirkkaassa hopeakalvossa. Ja kaikki oli ollut, niinkuin taiteen tuleekin
olla: vlitnt, ihanteellista ja kaukaista. -- Ern pivn -- joskus
olen halukas luulemaan, ett se oli onneton piv -- ptin maalata
ihanan kuvan sinusta, sellaisena kuin sin todellisesti olit, ei
menneiden aikojen verhossa, vaan omassa puvussasi, oman aikasi keskell.
En tied, tokko tytavan realismi sen vaikutti, vai sinun
personallisuutesi, joka ilmeni nyt minulle ilman minknlaista verhoa
tai varjostusta. Sen tiedn vain, ett tyskennellessni minusta tuntui,
iknkuin jokainen vrihitu ja pensselinveto olisi ilmaissut minun
salaisuuttani. Min aloin pelt, ett muut nkisivt minun
jumaloitsemiseni. Min tunsin, Dorian, ett olin ilmaissut liian paljon,
ett olin liiaksi pannut siihen omaa itseni. Sen vuoksi ptin etten
koskaan asettaisi kuvaa nytteille. Sin olit hiukan pahoillasi; mutta
ethn sin voinut tiet mit se minulle merkitsi. Harry, jolle min
puhuin siit, nauroi minulle. Mutta min en vlittnyt siit. Kun kuva
oli valmis ja min istuin yksin sen kanssa, niin tunsin olevani
oikeassa... No niin, muutamia pivi myhemmin se vietiin pois minun
atelieristani, ja heti kun olin pssyt vapaaksi sen painostavasta ja
tenhoavasta lsnolosta, niin minusta tuntui mielettmlt, ett olin
luullut nkevni siin muuta kuin ett sinun kasvosi olivat erinomaisen
kauniit ja ett min osasin maalata. Nytkin on minun mielestni erehdys,
jos luulee voivansa ilmaista valmiissa teoksessa sit intohimoa, jota
tyt tehdessn tuntee. Taide on aina abstraktisempaa, kuin mit me
oletamme. Muoto ja vri ilmaisee, muotoa ja vri -- siin kaikki.
Minusta tuntuu usein, ett taide voipi salata taiteilijan paljoa
tydellisemmin kuin saattaa hnet ilmi. Ja sen vuoksi, kun sain tuon
tarjouksen Parisista, niin arvelin ett sinun muotokuvasi voisi olla
nyttelyn ptauluna. En koskaan voinut ajatella ett sin kieltisit.
Nyt huomaan ett olet oikeassa. Taulua ei voi asettaa nytteille. l
ole minulle pahoillasi, Dorian, siit mit sinulle olen puhunut.
Niinkuin sanoin jo kerta Harryllekin, sin olet luotu jumaloitavaksi."

Dorian Gray veti syvlt henken. Puna palasi hnen poskiinsa ja
hymyily karehti hnen huuliensa ymprill. Vaara oli hdetty.
Toistaiseksi hn oli turvassa. Mutta sittenkn hn ei voinut olla
tuntematta sli maalaria kohtaan, joka juuri oli lopettanut tuon
omituisen tunnustuksensa, ja hn ihmetteli, tokko koskaan jonkun ystvn
personallisuus saattaisi vallata hnet yht suuressa mrss. Lordi
Henry oli viehttv sen vuoksi, ett hn oli vaarallinen. Mutta siin
kaikki. Hn oli liian viisas ja liian kyynillinen, jotta hneen
todellakin voisi kiinty. Tutustuisiko hn koskaan henkiln, jota hn
voisi jumaloida? Olisiko se yksi niist kokemuksista, joita elm oli
hnt varten varannut?

"Sep on ihmeellist, Dorian", sanoi Hallward, "ett sin olet sen
huomannut kuvassa. Oletko todellakin sen huomannut?"

"Jotakin min olen huomannut", hn vastasi, "jotakin joka tuntui minusta
varsin ihmeelliselt."

"No niin, sin sallit kai minun nyt katsella kuvaa?"

Dorian pudisti ptn. "l pyyd sit, Basil. En voi mitenkn antaa
sinun katsella sit."

"Mutta toisella kertaa?"

"Ei koskaan."

"No, ehk olet oikeassa. Hyvsti, Dorian. Sin olet ainoa ihminen, joka
olet todellakin vaikuttanut minun taiteeseni. Mit hyv olen saanut
aikaan, siit saan sinua kiitt. Ah! et tied, kuinka vaikeata minun
oli kertoa tuota kaikkea sinulle."

"Rakas Basil", sanoi Dorian, "mit sin olet kertonut minulle? Vain sen,
ett tunsit ihailevasi minua liian paljon. Eihn se ole edes
imartelevaa."

"Se ei ollut aiottukaan imarteluksi. Se oli tunnustus. Nyt kun olen sen
tehnyt, niin minusta tuntuu iknkuin olisin kadottanut jotakin. Ehkp
ei pitisi koskaan koettaa sanoilla ilmilausua jumaloimistansa."

"Tuo tunnustus tuotti minulle pettymyst."

"Vai niin, mit sin sitten odotit, Dorian? Et suinkaan sin ole
huomannut mitn muuta kuvassa? Eihn siin ollut mitn muuta
nhtv?"

"Ei; siin ei ollut mitn muuta. Miksik kysyt? Mutta l puhu
jumaloimisesta. Se on mieletnt. Me olemme ystvi, Basil, ja meidn
pit alati pysy ystvin."

"Sinulla on nyt Harry", sanoi maalari surullisena.

"Ah, Harryko?" huudahti nuorukainen kevesti nauraen. "Harry kuluttaa
pivns puhumalla tolkuttomuuksia ja iltansa tekemll mahdottomuuksia.
Juuri sellaista elm minkin tahtoisin viett. Mutta en sittenkn
usko, ett menisin Harryn luo, jos joutuisin htn. Mielemmin tulisin
sinun luoksesi, Basil."

"Tahdotko ruveta minulle taas malliksi?"

"Mahdotonta!"

"Sinun kieltosi turmelee minun elmni taiteilijana, Dorian. Ei kukaan
lyd kahta ihannetta elmssn. Harva yhden ainoankin."

"En voi selitt sit sinulle, Basil, mutta en voi koskaan en ruveta
sinulle malliksi. Muotokuvassa voi olla jotakin turmiollista. Sill on
oma elmns. Min tulen sinun luoksesi teet juomaan. Se voi olla yht
huvittavaa."

"Huvittavampaa sinulle, sen kyll uskon", mutisi Hallward suruissaan.
"Ja nyt, j hyvsti. Olen pahoillani, ettet anna minun koskaan katsella
kuvaa. Mutta eihn sille voi mitn. Min ymmrrn tydellisesti sinun
tunteesi."

Kun maalari lksi huoneesta, niin Dorian hymyili itseksens. Basil
parka! Kuinka vhn hn aavisti todellista syyt! Ja miten ihmeellist,
sen sijaan ett hnen olisi pitnyt ilmaista oma salaisuutensa, hn
olikin aivan sattumalta pssyt ystvns salaisuuden perille! Maalarin
mielettmt mustasukkaisuuden kohtaukset, hnen kiihke ystvyytens,
hnen liioitellut ylistyspuheensa, hnen ksittmtn vaitiolonsa --
kaiken tuon hn nyt ksitti ja hnen mielens muuttui alakuloiseksi.
Tuollainen kiihke ystvyys tuntui hnest melkein traagilliselta.

Hn huokasi ja soitti kelloa. Kuva oli saatava piiloon mill hinnalla
hyvns. Toistamiseen hn ei tahtonut joutua samanlaiseen pulmaan. Hn
oli ollut mieletn antaessaan sen jd hetkeksikn huoneesen, mihin
kaikilla hnen ystvilln oli vapaa psy.




LUKU X.


Kun kamaripalvelija astui sisn, niin Dorian Gray katsoi tervsti
hneen ja ihmetteli tokko mies oli aikonut luoda silmyksen varjostimen
taakse. Mutta tm seisoi aivan vlinpitmttmn ja odotti kskyj.
Dorian sytytti paperossin ja astui peilin eteen ja katsoi siihen. Hn
saattoi nhd siin Viktorin kasvojen heijastuksen aivan selvsti. Ne
ilmaisivat vain levollista alistumista. Niiss ei ollut mitn, jota
olisi tarvinnut pelt. Mutta kuitenkin hn arveli parhaaksi olla
varoillansa.

Hyvin hitaalla nell hn sanoi haluavansa puhutella taloudenhoitajaa,
ja sitten hn kski Viktorin menn kehystentekijn luo ja pyyt hnt
lhettmn hnen luoksensa heti kaksi miest. Kun Viktor poistui
huoneesta, niin Dorian luuli huomaavansa, ett tmn silmt vilkkuivat
varjostinta kohti. Vai kuvitteliko hn sit vain mielessns?

Hetken kuluttua mrs. Leaf pyrhti kirjastoon mustassa silkkipuvussansa
ja vanhanaikuiset pumpuliset puolivantut ryppyisiss ksissn. Dorian
pyysi hnelt kouluhuoneen avainta.

"Vanhan kouluhuoneenko avainta, mr. Dorian?" huudahti taloudenhoitaja.
"Sehn on tynn tomua. Minun tytyy ensin puhdistuttaa sit ja asettaa
se jrjestykseen, ennenkuin te sinne menette. Teidn ei sovi sit nhd
sit ennen. Ei totta tosiaan."

"En min tahdo, ett sit siivotaan, Leaf. Min halusin vain avainta."

"No, herra, te tulette aivan hmhkinverkkoihin jos menette sinne
sisn. Eihn sit ole avattu lhes viiteen vuoteen, ei siit saakka
kuin vanha herra kuoli."

Hn sikhti kuullessaan mainittavan idinisns, hnell oli vain
kiusallisia muistoja hnest. "Ei sill vli", hn vastasi. "Min
tahdon vain nhd huoneita -- siin kaikki. Antakaa minulle avain."

"Tss on avain, herra", sanoi vanha nainen etsien vapisevin ksin
avainta avainkimpustansa. "Tss on avain. Min irroitan sen heti
paikalla kimpusta. Mutta ettehn aio ruveta asumaan tuolla ylhll,
herra, kun teill on niin mukava tll?"

"En, en", huudahti Dorian krsimttmsti. "Kiitos, Leaf. Ei ole muuta
tarvis."

Hn viipyi viel hetken aikaa ja jutteli talousasioistaan. Dorian
huokasi ja pyysi ett hn itse jrjestisi asiat parhaan ymmrryksens
mukaan. Hn poistui huoneesta hymyillen.

Kun ovi sulkeutui, niin Dorian pisti avaimen taskuunsa ja katsoi
ymprilleen huoneessa. Hnen silmiins osui suuri, punainen,
kullallakirjaeltu silkkipeite, komeaa venetsialaista tekoa
seitsemnnelttoista vuosisadalta, jonka hnen itins oli lytnyt
erst luostarista Bolognassa. Niin, se oli sopiva peite tuon hirven
kuvan ymprille. Sit oli ehk usein kytetty kuolleen verhona. Nyt sen
tuli salata jotakin, joka mys oli tuomittu katoamaan, hirvempn
kadotukseen, kuin mit itse kuolema oli -- jotakin, joka kauhua
kylvisi, eik kuitenkaan koskaan kuolisi. Samoinkuin madot kalvavat
ruumista, samoin hnen syntins turmelisivat maalatun kuvan. Ne
tuhoaisivat sen kauneuden ja pilaisivat sen sulouden. Ne tahraisivat ja
hpisisivt sen. Ja sittenkin se elisi yh edelleen. Se pysyisi aina
elossa.

Hn vrisi ja hetken aikaa hn katui, ettei hn ollut kertonut Basilille
todellista syyt siihen, miksi hn tahtoi pit kuvaa piilossa. Basil
olisi auttanut hnt vastustamaan lordi Henryn vaikutusta, sek hnen
oman luonteensa viettelev voimaa. Basilin rakkaus hneen -- sill se
oli todellakin rakkautta -- oli jalo ja suuri. Se ei ollut vain
tuollaista fysillist kauneuden ihailua, jonka aistit synnyttvt, ja
joka kuolee kun aistit vshtvt. Se oli samanlaista rakkautta kuin
Michel Angelo oli tuntenut, ja Montaigne, Winckelmann ja itse
Shakespeare. Niin, Basil olisi voinut pelastaa hnet. Mutta nyt se oli
myhist. Entisyytt saattoi aina tuhota. Katumus, kieltytyminen ja
unohdus saivat sen aikaan. Mutta tulevaisuutta ei voinut vltt.
Hness oli intohimoja, jotka pyrkisivt hurjina riehumaan, unelmia,
jotka tekisivt todellisiksi oman pahuutensa varjot.

Hn otti sohvalta suuren punakultaisen peitteen ja meni varjostimen
taakse. Olivatko kuvan kasvot muuttuneet vielkin julmemmiksi? Ne
nyttivt samanlaisilta kuin ennenkin; mutta sittenkin hnen inhonsa
sit kohtaan oli lisntynyt. Kultaiset kutrit, siniset silmt ja
ruusunpunaiset huulet kaikki ne olivat siin. Ilme yksin oli toinen. Se
oli hirvittv julmuudessansa. Verrattuna siihen syytkseen ja
moitteesen, joka tss hnt kohtasi, olivat Basilin nuhteet Sibyl Vanen
thden kovin heikkoja! -- heikkoja ja tyhjnpivisi! Hnen oma
sielunsa silmsi hneen tuosta taulusta ja vaati hnt tilinteolle.
Tuskan ilme nousi hnen kasvoihinsa ja hn heitti korean peitteen kuvan
yli. Samassa kuului kolkutus ovelta. Hn astui varjostimen takaa samassa
kuin palvelija tuli sisn.

"Miehet ovat tll, monsieur."

Dorian huomasi, ett hnen tytyi saada palvelija pois tielt. Hn ei
saisi tiet minne kuva joutuisi. Hness oli jotain salakavalaa, ja
hnen silmissn oli vaaniva, epluotettava katse. Dorian kvi istumaan
pydn reen ja kirjoitti pari sanaa lordi Henrylle pyyten hnelt
jotakin kirjaa lainaksi ja muistuttaen hnelle, ett heidn oli mr
tavata toisensa illalla neljnnest yli kahdeksan.

"Odota vastausta", hn sanoi, ojentaen kirjelipun Viktorille, "ja pyyd
miehet tnne sisn".

Parin, kolmen minuutin jlkeen kuului jlleen kolkutusta ja mr. Hubbard
itse, taitava kehystentekij South Audley Streetin varrelta astui sisn
yhdess nuoren, jykevn apulaisensa kanssa. Mr. Hubbard oli hyvinvoipa,
punapartainen, lyhyenlnt mies, jonka taiteen ihailu oli suuresti
vhentynyt sen vuoksi, ett ne taiteilijat, joiden kanssa hn oli
tekemisiss, melkein aina krsivt rahanpuutetta. Tavallisesti hn ei
koskaan lhtenyt puodistansa. Hn odotti, ett ihmiset tulisivat hnen
luoksensa. Mutta Dorian Grayn suhteen hn teki aina poikkeuksen.
Dorianissa oli jotain, joka lumosi kaikkia ihmisi. Oli nautinto vain
nhdkkin hnt.

"Mill voin teit palvella, mr. Gray?" hn sanoi hieroen lihavia,
pisamaisia ksin. "Arvelin parhaaksi tulla omassa personassani. Olen
vastikn saanut hyvin kauniit kehykset, herra. Lysin ne huutokaupasta.
Vanhaa firenzelist tekoa. Lienevt kotoisin Fonthillist. Sopivat
mainiosti johonkin uskonnolliseen aiheesen, mr. Gray."

"Olen pahoillani, ett vaivauduitte itse, mr. Hubbard. Min pistydyn
jonkun kerran katsomaan tuota kehyst -- vaikka minulta ei nykyn
liikene suuria uskonnollisiin aiheihin -- mutta tnn haluaisin vain
saada ern taulun kannetuksi ylkertaan. Se on aika raskas ja sen
thden aioin pyyt teilt pari miest apuun."

"Ei se mitn, mr. Gray. Olen mielissni, jos voin olla teille avuksi.
Mik taulu se on, herra?"

"Tm nin", vastasi Dorian tynten varjostimen syrjn. "Voitteko
kantaa sen peitteineen kaikkineen, aivan tllaisena? Pelkn ett se
muuten vioittuu portaissa."

"Se ky mainiosti, herra", sanoi nerokas kehystentekij ja alkoi
apulaisensa avulla irroittaa kuvaa pitkst messinkiketjusta, jonka
varassa se riippui. "Minne me saamme sen kantaa, mr. Gray?"

"Min nytn teille tiet, mr. Hubbard, jos tahdotte astua jljess. Tai
ehk teidn on parempi menn ensin. Paha kyll, se on kannettava aivan
yls. Mennn pportaita myten, ne ovat levemmt."

Hn avasi heille oven ja he astuivat eteiseen ja alkoivat nousta.
Taiteellisesti muovaeltu kehys teki kuvan hyvin suureksi ja
silloin-tllin Dorian yritti auttaa mukana, huolimatta mr. Hubbardin
innokkaista vastustamisista, joka tunsi aitoliikemiehen
vastenmielisyytt joka kerta, kun hn nki herrasmiehen tekevn jotakin
hydyllist.

"Aika kuorma, herra", puhkui pieni mies pstessn ylimmlle asteelle.
Ja hn pyyhki kiiltv otsaansa.

"Min pelkn, ett se oli liian raskas", mutisi Dorian avatessaan oven
siihen huoneesen, jonka tuli silytt hnen elmns salaisuutta ja
ktke hnen sielunsa ihmisten silmilt.

Hn ei ollut kynyt tss huoneessa neljn vuoteen -- ei todellakaan
siit saakka, kun hn ensin lapsena oli kyttnyt sit leikkikamarinaan
ja sitten hiukan vanhempana lukuhuoneenaan. Se oli suuri, kaunis huone,
jonka viimeinen lordi Kelso oli varta vasten rakennuttanut pienelle
tyttrens pojalle, jota hn aina oli vihannut ja tahtonut pit
loitolla sen vuoksi ett hn muistutti niin elvsti itins, sek mys
muistakin syist. Dorianista tuntui iknkuin tuo huone ei olisi
laisinkaan muuttunut. Siin oli suuri italialainen arkku, jonka
pinta-alat olivat tynn ihmeellisi kuvia ja kullattuja leikkauksia, ja
johon hn usein lapsena oli piiloutunut. Tuossa atlaspuinen kirjahylly
ja hnen koulukirjansa, jotka olivat tynn koirankorvia. Seinll sen
takana riippui sama rikkininen flandrilainen gobeliini, jossa
hallistunut kuningas ja kuningatar pelaavat shakkia puutarhassa
ja heidn ohitsensa ratsastaa joukko haukkamiehi, joiden
rautahansikkaisilla ksill istuu tupsupisi lintuja. Miten hyvin hn
muisti tuon kaiken! Jokainen hetki hnen yksinisest lapsuudestansa
palasi hnen mieleens, kun hn katseli ymprilleen. Hn muisteli
poikavuosiensa tahratonta puhtautta, ja hnest tuntui hirvelt, ett
tuo onneton kuva piilotettaisiin juuri tnne. Kuinka vhn hn noina
mennein aikoina oli aavistanut, mit hn elmss viel saisi kokea!

Mutta talossa ei ollut toista niin varmaa paikkaa, joka voisi ktke sen
vijyvilt katseilta. Hnen tallessaan oli avain, eik kukaan muu voinut
pst sinne. Punaisen peitteen alla kuvan kasvot muuttuisivat
elimellisiksi, ne liukenisivat ja tahrautuisivat. Mit se tekisi? Ei
kukaan saisi sit nhd. Ei hn itsekn sit nkisi. Miksik hn
seuraisi sielunsa hirve hvit? Hn itse pysyisi nuorena -- ja siin
kyllin. Ja sitpaitsi, eik hnen luonteensa voisi hienontua? Ei ollut
mitn syyt uskoa, ett tulevaisuus tulisi olemaan hpellinen. Ehkp
joku suuri rakkaus valtaisi hnen elmns, puhdistaisi hnet ja
varjelisi hnt niilt synneilt, jotka jo nyttivt liikkuvan hnen
ruumiissaan ja sielussaan -- nuo kummalliset, hmrt synnit, jotka
olivat niin kiihoittavia ja suloisia juuri salaperisyytens vuoksi.
Ehkp kerran tuo julma piirre hviisi punaisen, tuntehikkaan suun
ymprilt, ja hn saattaisi nytt maailmalle Basilin mestariteosta.

Ei; se oli mahdotonta. Tunti tunnilta, viikko viikolta kuva vanhenisi.
Se voisi vltt synnin hirmuisuutta, mutta in kauheudet jisivt sille
sittenkin. Posket kuihtuisivat ja laihtuisivat. Keltaiset rypyt
uurtuisivat himmeitten silmien ymprille ja tekisivt ne muodottomiksi.
Hiusten kiilto katoaisi, suu suurenisi tai vajoaisi sisn ja tulisi
naurettavaksi ja karkeaksi, niinkuin vanhojen miesten suut ainakin.
Kaula painuisi rypyille, kdet muuttuisivat kylmiksi ja tyteen sinisi
suonia ja vartalo koukistuisi aivan kuin idinisnkin, joka oli
kohdellut hnt niin kovasti lapsuuden aikana. Taulu oli piiloitettava.
Sit ei voinut auttaa.

"Tuokaa se sisn, Mr. Hubbard, tehk hyvin", sanoi Dorian vsyneesti
kntyen taakseen. "Olen pahoillani, ett annoin teidn odottaa niin
kauan. Ajatukseni olivat muualla."

"Hyv on hiukan levhtkkin, mr. Gray", vastasi kehystentekij yh
lhtten. "Minnek saamme sen asettaa, herra?"

"Oi, minne hyvns. Tnne, tss sill on hyv paikka. En huoli ripustaa
sit seinlle. Asettakaa se vain sein vasten. Kiitos."

"Ettek sallisi minun katsella taideteosta, herra?"

Dorian stkhti. "Ei se huvittaisi teit, mr. Hubbard", hn sanoi,
katsoen tervsti mieheen. Hn olisi ollut valmis hykkmn miehen
kimppuun ja heittmn hnet kumoon, jos hn uskaltaisi kohottaa komeata
peitett, jonka alla hnen elmns salaisuus piili. "En tahdo viivytt
teit sen enemp. Olen teille hyvin kiitollinen, kun vaivauduitte
tnne".

"Ei kannata, ei kannata, mr. Gray. Olen valmis aina palvelemaan teit,
herra." Ja mr. Hubbard astui alas portaita apulaisensa kanssa, joka
vilkaisi taaksensa Dorianiin arka, ihmettelev ilme karkeissa, rumissa
kasvoissaan. Niin kaunista miest ei hn ennen ollut nhnyt.

Kun heidn askeltensa ni oli vaiennut, niin Dorian lukitsi oven ja
pisti avaimen taskuunsa. Nyt hn oli turvattu. Ei kukaan saisi katsella
tuota julmaa kuvaa. Ei kukaan vieras silm saisi nhd hnen hpens.

Tullessaan kirjastoon hn huomasi, ett kello oli jo viisi ja ett tee
oli tuotu sisn. Pienell, hyvnhajuisesta puusta tehdyll,
helmiiskoristeisella pydll, jonka hn oli saanut lahjaksi
holhoojansa vaimolta, lady Radleylt -- hn oli kaunis nainen, joka
luuli aina olevansa sairas, ja sen vuoksi oli viettnyt koko talven
Kairossa --, oli kirje lordi Henrylt ja sen vieress keltasiteinen
kirja, jonka kannet olivat hiukan kuluneet ja kulmat tahrautuneet.
Numero _St. James's Gazettea_, oli teetarjottimella.

Viktor oli siis palannut takaisin. Dorian ihmetteli, tokkopa hn oli
kohdannut miehet eteisess, kun nmt olivat poismenossa, ja saanut
heilt kuulla miss toimessa he olivat olleet. Hn varmaan huomaisi,
ett kuva ei ollut en paikoillansa -- ehkp hn oli sen jo huomannut
tuodessaan teekojeet sisn. Varjostin oli unohtunut paikoilleen
panematta ja seinll ammotti tyhj sija. Ehkp hn jonakin iltana
huomaisi Viktorin hiipivn yls portaita ja koettavan murtautua
huoneesen. Hirvet jos omassa talossa olisi vakoilija. Hn oli kuullut
kerrottavan rikkaista miehist, joilta joku palvelija koko elmn ajan
oli kiristnyt rahoja sen vuoksi, ett hn oli lukenut jonkun kirjeen
tai kuullut jonkun keskustelun tai lytnyt jonkun kortille kirjoitetun
osoitteen tai kuihtuneen kukan tyynyn alta tai rypistetyn pitsipalasen.

Hn huokasi ja kaadettuaan hiukan teet kuppiin hn avasi lordi Henryn
kirjeen. Tm ilmoitti vain lhettvns hnelle iltalehden ja kirjan,
joka ehk huvittaisi hnt, ja lupasi olla klubissa neljnnest yli
kahdeksan. Dorian avasi vlinpitmttmsti St. James's Gazetten ja
silmili sit. Hnen silmns osuivat punaiseen merkkiin viidennell
sivulla. Hnen huomionsa kntyi seuraavaan ilmoitukseen:

     "_Ern nyttelijttren ruumiintarkastus._ -- Tn aamuna
     toimitettiin Bell Tavernissa, Hoxton roadin varrella piirituomari
     mr. Danbyn toimesta Sibyl Vanen ruumiintarkastus, joka oli
     nyttelijttren Royal teatterissa, Holbornissa. Kuolintodistus
     mainitsee kuoleman syyksi tapaturman. Suurta sli hertti
     vainajan iti, joka oli aivan suunniltansa sek oman ett tohtori
     Birrellin todistuksen aikana, joka jlkiminen oli suorittanut
     ruumiintarkastuksen."

Dorian rypisti otsaansa ja repisten lehden kahtia hn astui huoneen
poikki ja heitti pois paperipalat. Kuinka ruma tuo juttu oli! Kuinka
hirve itse todellisuus! Hn oli hiukan pahoillaan lordi Henrylle sen
johdosta ett tm oli lhettnyt hnelle tuon ilmoituksen. Ja miten
tyhm merkit se punaisella viivalla. Olisihan Viktor voinut lukea sen.
Siksi paljon englannin kielt hn jo osasi.

Ehkp hn oli lukenutkin sen ja oli jo ruvennut epilemnkin. Vaikka
mitp se merkitsisi? Mit Sibyl Vanen kuolema liikutti Dorian Grayt?
Ei ollut vhintkn syyt pelt. Dorian Gray ei ollut tappanut hnt.

Hnen silmns osuivat keltaiseen kirjaan, jonka lordi Henry oli
lhettnyt. Mikhn se oli, hn tuumi itseksens. Hn astui pienen
helmenvrisen, kahdeksankulmaisen pydn luo, joka hnen mielestns oli
kuin ihmeellisten egyptilisten mehilisten hopeatyt, ja ottaen kirjan
kteens, hn heittytyi nojatuoliin ja alkoi selailla sen lehti.
Hetken kuluttua hn syventyi siihen kokonaan. Se oli ihmeellisin kirja,
mit hn elissn oli lukenut. Hnest tuntui kuin kaikki maailman
synnit olisivat kulkeneet mykss saatossa hnen ohitsensa ihmeellisiin
pukuihin puettuina, huilujen vienojen svelten soidessa. Ja monet
hmrt unelmat muuttuivat kki todellisiksi ja elviksi.

Se oli romaani ilman minknlaista varsinaista toimintaa, kuvaus yhdest
ainoasta luonteesta, psykologinen tutkimus nuoresta parisilaisesta
miehest, joka yhdeksnnelltoista vuosisadalla yritti toteuttaa kaikkia
menneitten vuosisatojen intohimoja ja ajatustapoja, itseens koota
kaikki erilaiset maailmanhengen tunnevivahdukset, samalla kertaa
rakastaen teennisyytens vuoksi niit kieltymyksi, joita ihmiset
tyhmsti nimittvt hyveiksi, sek niit luonnollisia, kapinoitsevia
purkauksia, joita viisaat ihmiset yh vielkin sanovat synniksi. Kirjan
tyyli oli omituisen skeniv, samalla kertaa vilkas ja hmr, tynn
jargonia ja vanhentuneita puheenparsia, teknillisi sanoja ja
kaunopuheisia kuvauksia, jotka ovat luontaisia ranskalaisen, symbolisen
koulun hienoimmille taiteilijoille. Vertauskuvat olivat kuin
jttilis-orkidejoja, vriltn yht herkullisia kuin nekin. Himojen
elm oli kuvattu salaperisen filosofian ksitteill. Ajoittain saattoi
tuskin ksitt lukiko keskiaikaisen pyhimyksen yliaistillisia
purkauksia vai uudenaikaisen synnintekijn sairaalloisia tunnustuksia.
Se oli myrkyllinen kirja. Raskas suitsutuksen tuoksu tuntui nousevan sen
lehdilt ja hmmentvn aivoja. Vain lauseitten rytmi, niiden hieno,
yksitoikkoinen musiikki, jossa monimutkaiset loppuskeet ja taiteelliset
virtaukset uudistuivat, herttivt nuorukaisessa hnen siirtyessn
luvusta lukuun, haaveentapaisen mielentilan, sairaalloisen horroksen,
jotta hn ei huomannut, ett ilta alkoi jo hmrt ja varjot hiipi
sisn.

Pilvettmn, vain yksinisen thden valaisemana vaskenvihre taivas
loisti ikkunasta sisn. Hn luki edelleen kalpeassa valossa, kunnes hn
ei nhnyt en mitn. Vasta sitten kun kamaripalvelija oli kynyt
useamman kerran huomauttamassa hnelle, ett oli jo myhist, hn nousi
ja astui viereiseen huoneesen, ja laskettuaan kirjan pienelle
firenzeliselle pydlle vuoteensa viereen, hn alkoi pukeutua
pivllisi varten.

Kello oli jo melkein yhdeksn, kun hn saapui klubiin, jossa lordi Henry
istui yksin seurusteluhuoneessa ja nytti hyvin harmistuneelta.

"Olen kovin pahoillani, Harry", huudahti Dorian, "mutta syy on kokonaan
sinun. Tuo kirja, jonka sin lhetit minulle kiehtoi minun mieleni
siihen mrin, ett unohdin kokonaan ajan kulun."

"Niin, arvasinhan sen, ett sin pitisit siit", vastasi lordi Henry
nousten yls tuoliltaan.

"En min sanonut pitvni siit, Harry. Min sanoin ett se kiehtoi
minun mieleni. Siin, on suuri eroitus."

"Ah, oletko sin huomannut sen?" mutisi lordi Henry. Ja he menivt
yhdess ruokasaliin.




LUKU XI.


Vuosikausiin ei Dorian Gray voinut vapautua tmn kirjan vaikutuksesta.
Tai ehkp pikemmin hn ei koskaan koettanutkaan vapautua siit. Hn
tilasi Parisista kokonaista yhdeksn kappaletta sen ensimist
suurikokoista painosta ja sidotti ne erivrisiin kansiin, jotta ne
soveltuisivat hnen vaihteleviin mielialoihinsa ja hnen luonteensa
muutteleviin mielijohteihin, joita hn ajoittain ei nyttnyt yhtn
voivan hallita. Kirjan sankari, nuori ihmeellinen parisilainen, jonka
olennossa romantinen ja tieteellinen temperamentti niin kummasti oli
sekaantunut, muuttui hnelle jonkinmoiseksi perikuvaksi hnest
itsestns. Ja tosiaan koko kirja nytti hnest ksittelevn hnen oman
elmns tarinaa, joka oli kirjoitettu jo ennen kuin hn itse oli
elmns elnytkn.

Yhdess kohdin hn oli onnellisempi kuin romaanin haaveenomainen
sankari. Hn ei tuntenut -- eik hnell ollut koskaan ollut siihen
syytkn -- ensinkn tuota omituista kauhua peilej, kiillotettuja
metallilevyj eik tyynt vedenpintaa kohtaan, joka niin varhain jo oli
vallannut tuon nuoren parisilaisen ja joka oli johtunut siit, ett hn
niin kki oli kadottanut kaikkien ihaileman erinomaisen kauneutensa.
Melkein julmalla ilolla -- ja ehkp kaikessa ilossa ja varsinkin
nautinnossa on jotakin julmaakin -- hn luki viimeisen osan kirjaa, joka
antaa traagillisen, joskohta hiukan liioitellun kuvauksen ihmisen
surusta ja eptoivosta, kun hn itse kadottaa sen, mihin hn muissa ja
koko maailmassa on pannut enimmin arvoa.

Sill se ihmeellinen kauneus, joka oli lumonnut Basil Hallwardin ja
monta muuta hnen rinnallansa, ei nyttnyt hvivn. Nekin, jotka
olivat kuulleet hnest kerrottavan kaikkein pahinta, -- silloin-tllin
levisikin hnen elmntavoistansa Lontoossa omituisia huhuja, jotka
joutuivat juorunaiheiksi klubeihin -- eivt voineet uskoa hnest mitn
kunniatonta, kun he nkivt hnet. Hnen katseensa oli niin puhdas,
iknkuin maailma ei olisi tahrannut hnt. Trkepuheiset miehet
vaikenivat, kun Dorian Gray astui sisn. Hnen kasvojensa puhtaassa
ilmeess oli jotakin nuhtelevaa. Vain hnen lsnolonsakin palautti
heidn mieleens muiston siit viattomuudesta, jota he olivat
tahranneet. He ihmettelivt miten niin suloiseen ja kauniisen olentoon
kuin hneen ei ollut tarttunut elmn lokaa ja aistillisuutta.

Usein palattuaan kotiin pitkilt ja salaperisilt retkiltns, jotka
antoivat aihetta outoihin huhuihin hnen todellisten ett oletettujen
ystviens parissa, hn hiipi itse lukittuun huoneesen ylkerrassa,
avasi oven avaimella, jota hn ei koskaan laskenut luotaan ja seisahtui
peili kdess Basil Hallwardin maalaaman muotokuvan eteen. Hn katseli
vuoroin kuvan ilkeit, vanhentuvia piirteit, vuoroin kauniita, nuoria
kasvoja, jotka hymyilivt hnelle kiiltvn peilin pinnasta. Vastakohdan
rikeys kohotti hnen nautinnontunnettansa. Hn ihastui yh enemmn
omaan kauneuteensa ja seurasi yh kohoavalla mielenkiinnolla oman
sielunsa hvit. Hn tutki suurimmalla huolella ja joskus
mielettmll, hirvell nautinnolla niit rumia viivoja, jotka uursivat
otsaa ja hiipivt paksun, aistillisen suun ymprill, ja hn saattoi
kysy itseltns, mikhn oli kauhua herttvmp, synnink vai in
jljet. Hn saattoi asettaa valkeat ktens kuvan phttyneitten,
muodottomien ksien viereen ja hymyill. Hn ivasi murtunutta vartaloa
ja riutuneita jseni.

Joskus kuitenkin isin, kun hn makasi unettomana omassa hajuvesilt
tuoksuvassa huoneessansa tai huonomaineisen kapakan likaisessa kamarissa
lhell laivatokkaa, jossa hn valepuvussa ja vrll nimell usein
oleskeli, hn ajatteli slill sit turmiota, johon hn oli oman
sielunsa saattanut, ja tuo slintunne oli sit voimakkaampi, koska se
oli kokonaan itseks. Mutta tuollaiset hetket olivat harvinaisia.
Uteliaisuus elmn nhden, jonka lordi Henry oli ensin herttnyt
hness heidn istuessaan yhdess ystvn puutarhassa, nytti vain
kasvavan sit myten kuin hn sit tyydytti. Mit enemmn hn tiesi,
sit enemmn hn halusi tiet. Hn tunsi mieletnt nlk, joka yltyi
vain suuremmaksi sit myten kuin hn koetti sit tyydytt.

Mutta sittenkn hn ei laiminlynyt mitn, ei ainakaan
velvollisuuksiaan seuraelm kohtaan. Kerran tai kahdesti talvella ja
joka keskiviikko-ilta kevtkauden kestess, hnen kaunis kotinsa oli
avoinna vieraille, ja kuuluisimmat sveltaiteilijat huvittivat vieraita
taiteensa ihmeill. Hnen pienet pivlliskutsunsa, joiden
jrjestmisess lordi Henry aina oli avullisena, olivat kuuluisat yht
paljon tarkasta vieraiden valinnasta ja heidn sijoituksestaan kuin
aistikkaasta pydn kattamisesta ja sen sopusointuisista korulaitteista,
etelmaisista kukista, kirjailluista liinoista ja vanhanaikuisista
kulta- ja hopea-astioista. Olipa useita, varsinkin nuorempien miesten
parissa, jotka nkivt, tai luulivat nkevns Dorian Grayss
toteutuneena sen tyypin, josta he usein Etonissa tai Oxfordissa olivat
uneksineet, tyypin, jossa yhdistyi oppineen korkea sivistys ja
maailmanmiehen miellyttv, ylhinen ja hieno kyts. Heidn mielestn
hn nytti kuuluvan niihin ihmisiin, joista Dante sanoo, ett he
koettivat "tydent itsen jumaloimalla kauneutta." Samoinkuin Gautier
hnkin oli niit ihmisi, joille "nkyv maailma todellakin oli
olemassa."

Hnelle elm oli todellakin ensiminen ja suurin taiteista, ja kaikki
muut taiteet olivat vain valmistelua elm varten. Muoti, jonka kautta
eriskummallisuus hetkeksi levi kaikkialle, keikailu, joka tavallaan
koettaa lujentaa kauneuden ehdotonta muotivaltaa, viehttivt tietenkin
hnt. Hnen tapansa pukeutua, ne erilaiset tyylit, joita hn aika-ajoin
suosi, vaikuttivat suuresti niihin nuoriin keikailijoihin, jotka
nyttytyivt Mayfair-tanssiaisissa ja Pall Mall-klubin ikkunoissa. He
matkivat hnt kaikessa mit hn teki ja koettivat tavoitella sit
huolettoman viehttv keikailua, joka ilmautui hnen kytksessn,
mutta joka oli vain puoleksi vakavasti tarkoitettua.

Hn oli liiankin halukas ottamaan vastaan sen mrvn aseman, jota
hnelle heti tysi-ikiseksi tultuaan tarjottiin, ja hn tunsi suurta
nautintoa ajatellessaan, ett hn voisi vaikuttaa oman aikansa Lontoosen
yht syvsti kuin "Satyriconin" tekij aikoinaan Neron keisarilliseen
Roomaan. Mutta sydmens sisimmss hn toivoi voivansa olla enemmnkin
kuin vain _arbiter elegantiarum_ [Hienouden tuomari], jonka kanssa
neuvotellaan jalokivist, kaulahuivin solmimisesta ja kvelykepin
pitmisest. Hn koetti laatia uutta elmnjrjestelm, jolla olisi
jrkev filosofiansa ja jrjestetyt periaattensa, sek etsi korkeimman
pmaalinsa aistien hengistyttmisess.

Aistien jumaloimista on usein ja tydell syyll moitittu, sill ihmiset
pelkvt vaistomaisesti intohimoja ja mielenkiihoituksia, jotka
nyttvt olevan heit itsen voimakkaammat, ja jotka heill ovat
yhteisi alempien luontokappaleiden kanssa. Mutta Dorian Grayn mielest
tuntui silt, kuin ei koskaan olisi ymmrretty aistien todellista
luonnetta, ett ne olivat jneet villeiksi ja elimellisiksi vain sen
vuoksi, ett maailma oli koettanut nnnytt niit nlll saadakseen
ne alistumaan tai kiusannut ne kuoliaaksi, sen sijaan ett olisi
yritetty kehitt niit uuden sielunelmn alkuaineiksi, sielunelmn,
jonka vallitsevana tunnusmerkkin olisi hieno kauneudenaisti. Kun hn
seurasi ihmisen kehityst historiassa, niin hnest tuntui, ett niin
sanomattoman paljon oli mennyt hukkaan. Miten paljon oli uhrattu! Ja
kuinka turhan thden! Miten paljon mieletnt, tahallista alistumista,
hirveit itsekidutuksia ja kieltymyksi, jotka olivat johtuneet pelosta
ja joiden seurauksena oli ollut alennuksen tila, paljoa julmempi kuin se
luuloiteltu alennuksen tila, jota ihmiset ymmrtmttmyydessn olivat
yrittneet vltt. Sill luonto oli sala-ivaten karkoittanut erakot
ermaahan ja antanut heille metsn pedot seuralaisikseen.

Niin, uusi hedonismi, niinkuin lordi Henry oli ennustanut, oli luova
uudestaan elmn ja vapahtava sen siit ankarasta, epkauniista
puritanisuudesta, joka meidn pivinmme omituisella tavalla on hernnyt
uuteen eloon. Tietysti se palvelisi nerollisuutta; mutta se ei koskaan
hyvksyisi sellaista teoriaa tai jrjestelm, joka sisltisi
intohimojen kokemuksen uhraamisen. Sen pmrn olisi itse kokemus,
eik kokemusten hedelmt, olkoot ne miten makeita tai karvaita hyvns.
Se ei tietisi mitn asketismista, joka tappaa himot, eik trkest
riettaudesta, joka ne huumaa. Mutta se opettaisi ihmist keskittmn
voimansa erityisiin hetkiin elmss, joka itsessn ei ole muuta kuin
yht ainoaa hetke.

Harva meist lienee, joka ei ainakin joskus ole hernnyt ennen aamun
koittoa joko unelmattoman yn jlkeen, mik melkein saattaa meidt
rakastumaan kuolemaan, tai kauhun ja inhottavan ilon yn jlkeen,
jolloin aivojen sopukoissa liitelee aaveita, hirvempi kuin itse
todellisuus, sen herkn elmn kiihoittamina, joka vijyy kaikessa
groteskissa ja joka gootilaiselle taiteelle -- tuolle taiteelle, mik
nytt erityisesti soveltuvan niille, joiden mielt sairaalloiset
unelmat ovat samentaneet -- antaa sen sitken elinvoiman. Vitkalleen
hiipivt valkoiset sormet uutimia pitkin, jotta ne nyttvt
vavahtelevan. Mustina, eriskummallisina haamuina kiertvt nettmt
varjot huoneen nurkkia ja kyyristyvt niihin kokoon. Ulkoa kuuluu
lintujen pyrhdys pensaissa -- tai tyhn kiiruhtavien miesten
askelten net, tai tuulen huohotus ja valitus, kun se laskeutuu alas
kukkuloilta ja kiertelee hiljaisen talon ympri, iknkuin se pelkisi
hertt unesta nukkujat ja kuitenkin tahtoisi houkutella unen
purppuraluolastaan. Ohut, himme harso kohoaa kerros kerrokselta,
vhitellen esineiden muodot ja vrit palautuvat, ja me nemme miten
aamunkoite asettaa maailman entiseen asuunsa. Kalpeat peilit kuvastavat
jlleen elm. Sammuneet vahakynttilt seisovat siin, mihin me ne
olemme jttneet ja niiden vieress puoleksi aukileikattu kirja, jota
olemme lukeneet, tai rautalankaan pistetty kukka, jota tanssiaisissa
olemme kyttneet, tai kirje, jota emme ole uskaltaneet lukea, tai
lukeneet liian usein. Ei mikn nyt muuttuneen. Yn eptodellisista
varjoista kohoaa jlleen todellinen elm esiin, jota me tunnemme. Me
jatkamme sit siin, miss me sen lopetimme, ja me tunnemme
tuskallisesti ett olemme pakoitetut kyttmn voimiamme vanhojen
tapojen vsyttvn yksitoikkoisuuteen, tai toivomme mielettmsti, ett
silmiemme eteen jonakin aamuna aukeaisi uusi maailma, joka pimeydess
olisi uudestaan luotu meidn onneamme varten, maailma, jossa esineill
olisi uusi muoto ja uudet vrit ja jossa piilisi uusia salaisuuksia,
maailma, jossa entisyydell olisi hyvin pieni sija tai ei olisi sit
laisinkaan tai jossa se ei ainakaan jatkuisi missn tietoisessa
velvollisuuksien tai katumuksen muodossa, koska ilon muistoihinkin
ktkeytyy katkeruutta ja nautinnon mieleenpalauttamisessakin on tuskaa.

Tuollaisten maailmojen luomien oli Dorian Grayn mielest elmn
todellinen tarkoitus, tai ainakin yksi sen todellisista tarkoituksista.
Ja etsiessn aistimuksia, jotka samalla olivat uusia ja mieluisia ja
tynn salaperisyytt, mik on niin ominaista romantiikalle, hn omisti
usein itselleen sellaisia ajatustapoja, jotka todellisuudessa olivat
vieraita hnen luonteellensa, ja antautui niiden viehttvn vaikutuksen
alaiseksi. Mutta kun hn niin sanoaksemme oli saanut kiinni niiden
vrist, ja hnen henkinen uteliaisuutensa oli tyydytetty, niin hn
luopui niist tuolla merkillisell vlinpitmttmyydell, joka ei ole
aivan vieras piirre hehkuvalle temperamentille, vaan vielp muutamien
nykyaikaisten psykologien mielest onkin usein sen ehtona.

Huhuiltiin kerta hnest ett hn liittyisi roomalais-katoliseen uskoon;
ja roomalaiset kirkonmenot viehttivtkin hnt suuresti. Jokapivinen
uhraaminen, joka todellakin on paljoa hirvittvmpi kuin kaikki vanhan
ajan uhrit, miellytti hnt siksi, ett se kopeasti hylksi aistien
todistuksen, ett sen perusaiheet olivat niin alkuperisen
yksinkertaisia ja ett se yllpiti ikuista paatosta siin inhimillisess
murhenytelmss, jota se koetti symboliserata. Hn polvistui mielelln
kylmlle marmorilattialle ja tarkasteli pappia, joka jykss, kukilla
kirjaillussa messukaavussaan hitaasti liikuttaen valkoisia ksin
siirsi peitteen tabernakelista tai nosti hohtokivist kimaltelevaa,
lyhdynmuotoista monstransia kalpeine hostioineen, jonka joskus saattoi
todellakin uskoa olevan "_panis caelestis_", enkelien leip, tai kun
hn paastopuvussa mursi hostian kalkin joukkoon ja li rintaansa
syntiens vuoksi. Hyryvt suitsutusastiat, joita vakavamuotoiset pojat
pitsi- ja punapukuisina heiluttelivat ilmassa kuin suuria, kullattuja
kukkia, tenhosivat hnt. Kun hn astui ulos kirkosta, niin hn
tarkasteli ihmeissn mustia rippituoleja ja olisi halunnut istua niiden
hmrss varjossa ja kuunnella, kun miehet ja naiset kuluneen ristikon
lpi kuiskaisivat elmns tosikertomusta.

Mutta hn ei koskaan tehnyt itsen syypksi siihen erehdykseen, ett
hn olisi estnyt henkist kehitystns liittymll muodollisesti
mihinkn uskontunnustukseen tai jrjestelmn, eik hn koskaan
erehdyksest luullut kodiksi ravintolaa, jossa ei sovi viett muuta
kuin yhden yn tai muutaman tunnin, kun thdet eivt kiilu taivaalla ja
kuu on synnytystuskissansa. Mystiikka, jolla on niin kummallinen kyky
muuttaa kaikki jokapivinen ihmeelliseksi, ja herkk antinomismi, joka
aina nytt sit seuraavan, hertti hnen mielenkiintoansa yhden
kevtkauden. Toisen kevtkauden hn tunsi mieltymyst saksalaisen
darwinistisen liikkeen materialistisia oppeja kohtaan, ja seurasi
suurella huvilla ihmisen ajatuksia ja himoja aina helmimisiin aivojen
kammioihin tai ruumiin valkeihin hermoihin saakka, ja hnt hurmasi se
ajatus, ett sielu oli kokonaan riippuvainen muutamista fyysillisist
ominaisuuksista, sairaalloisista tai terveist, normaalisista tai
epnormaalisista. Mutta, niinkuin jo ennen olemme sanoneet, ei mikn
elmn teoria ollut hnest trke verrattuna itse elmn. Hn tunsi
selvsti, miten hedelmttmi kaikki lylliset spekulatsionit olivat,
kun ne eivt liity toimintaan ja kokeiluihin. Hn tiesi ett aisteilla,
samoinkuin sielullakin, on henkisi salaperisyyksi ilmaistavana.

Sitten hn rupesi tutkimaan hajuvesi, niiden tekotavan salaisuuksia.
Hn tisleerasi vkevhajuisia ljyj ja poltti itmaalaisia tuoksuvia
hartseja. Hn huomasi ettei ollut olemassa ainoatakaan sieluntunnelmaa,
jolla ei olisi ollut vastinettaan aistillisessa elmss, ja hn ptti
koettaa keksi niiden todelliset yhdyssiteet. Hn mietiskeli mik se
pyhss suitsutuksessa hertti salaperist tunnelmaa ja mik se
ambrassa kiihoitti intohimoja, miksi orvokintuoksu toi mieleen kadonneen
rakkauden, miksi myski sai aikaan hiriit aivoissa ja miksi champak
turmeli mielikuvituksen. Ja hn koetti laatia kokonaisen psykologian
hajuvesist, ja arvioida, mik vaikutus on imelhajuisilla juurilla,
tuoksuvilla siiteplyisill kukkasilla, hyvnhajuisella balsamilla,
tummalla, tuoksuvalla puulla, nardusvoiteella, joka saa aikaan
pahoinvointia ja aloella, jonka sanotaan voivan karkoittaa
alakuloisuutta mielest.

Toisin ajoin hn oli kokonaan musiikkiin vajonnut. Pitkullaisessa
huoneessa, jossa oli ikkunoiden edess ristikot, katto tulipunainen ja
kullattu ja seint oliivinvihreksi kiilloitetut, hnell oli tapana
pit omituisia konsertteja. Villit mustalaiset helisyttivt hurjasti
pieni sitrojaan tai vakavat tunisilaiset keltaisissa vaipoissaan
nphyttivt jttilisluuttojensa jnnitettyj kieli, samalla kuin
irvistelevt neekerit kalisuttivat yksitoikkoisesti vaskirumpujansa tai
solakat turbaanipiset indialaiset, kyyhtten punaisilla matoillaan,
soittivat pitki ruoko- tai messinkipillejns ja lumosivat, tai olivat
lumoavinansa suuria tupsupisi ja sarvekkaita krmeit. Villin soiton
jyrkt svelvlit ja kimet epsoinnut virkistivt hnt aika-ajoin,
jolloin Schubertin sulavuus, Chopinin jalo surumielisyys ja Beethovenin
mahtavat harmoniat eivt tehneet hneen minknlaista vaikutusta. Hn
kokoili kaikista maailman rist ihmeellisimmt soittokoneet mit hn
saattoi lyt, joko sukupuuttoon hvinneiden kansojen hautakummuista
tai niiden harvojen villiheimojen parista, jotka olivat jneet elmn
lnsimaisen sivistyksen kosketuksenkin jlkeen; ja hn liikutteli ja
kosketteli niit mielellns. Hnen hallussaan oli Rionegro-indianien
salaperinen _juruparis_, jota naisten ei ole lupa katsella ja jota
nuorukaisetkin saavat nhd vasta paaston ja kurituksen jlkeen.
Perulaisia saviruukkuja, jotka matkivat lintujen lpitunkevaa kirkunaa,
ihmisluista tehtyj huiluja, sellaisia, joita Alfonso de Ovalle kuuli
Chiless soitettavan sek vihreit, heljvi jaspiskivi, joita on
lydetty Cuzcon lheisyydess, ja joilla voi saada aikaan ihmeellisen
vienoa nt. Hnell oli maalattuja kurbitsoja, jotka olivat tytetyt
piikivill ja jotka kalisivat kun niit hytkytettiin; pitk mexikolainen
_clarin_, josta soittaja ei loihdi nt esiin puhaltamalla siihen
ilmaa, vaan vetmll henken sisn; kovaninen _ture_ Amazonivirran
varsilta, jota etuvartiat soittavat istuessaan korkeissa puissa, ja
jonka ni kuuluu kantavan puolentoista peninkulman phn;
_teponaztli_, jonka kahta vrjv puukielt soitetaan kepeill, jotka
ovat voidellut kasvien maitonesteest tehdyll elastisella gummilla;
Aztekien _yotl_-kulkusia, jotka riippuvat kuin viinimarjat rypleiss;
ja suuri sylinterin muotoinen rumpu, joka on krmeennahalla
pllystetty, samanlainen kuin se, jonka Bernal Diaz nki kydessn
Cortesin kanssa mexikolaisessa temppeliss, ja jonka valittavia sveli
hn on niin elvsti kuvannut. Noiden soittokalujen eriskummallinen
luonne tenhosi hnt, ja hnt ilahdutti se ajatus, ett taiteessakin,
samoinkuin luonnossa oli epsikiit, esineit, joilla oli elimelliset
muodot ja hirvet net. Jonkun ajan kuluttua hn kuitenkin kyllstyi
niihin ja tahtoi istua aitiossaan ooperassa, joko yksin tai lordi Henryn
seurassa, kuunnellen haltioissaan "Tannhuseri", jonka alkusoitossa hn
oli huomaavinaan oman sielunsa murhenytelmn.

Kerran hn alkoi tutkia jalokivi ja esiintyi pukutanssiaisissa
ranskalaisena amiraalina Anne de Joyeusena, pukunsa koristuksena
viisisataakuusikymment helme. Tm kiihko piti hnt useita vuosia
kahleissa eik oikeastaan koskaan lhtenyt hnest. Usein hn vietti
kokonaisia pivi jrjesten ja uudestaan jrjesten rasioihin niit
erilaisia kivi, joita hn oli koonnut. Hnell oli oliivinvihre
krysoberylli, joka lampun valossa muuttuu punaiseksi, hopeajuovainen
cymofani, pistachiovrinen krysoliitti, vaaleanpunaisia ja
viininkellertvi topaseja, tulipunaisia kiiltokivi, joissa oli
vrjvi neliterisi thti, liekehtelevi kanelikivi, oransivrisi
ja sinipunaisia spinellej, ametisteja, jotka kerroksittain vivahtelivat
rubiinien ja safirien vreiss. Hn rakasti auringonkiven punoittavaa
kultaa ja kuunkiven helmenpuhdasta valkeutta ja maidonvrisen opaalin
taittunutta sateenkaarta. Hn tilasi Amsterdamista kolme tavattoman
suurta ja vriltn prameata smaragdia ja hn omisti _de la vieille
roche_ turkosin, jota kaikki tuntijat kadehtivat.

Hn lysi mys ihmeellisi kertomuksia jalokivist. Alphonson
"Clericalis Disciplina'ssa" puhutaan krmeest, jonka silmt ovat
oikeita hyasintteja, ja romantisessa kertomuksessa Aleksanterista
sanotaan, ett Emathian valloittaja lysi Jordanin laaksossa krmeit,
"joiden selss kasvoi aitosmaragdiketjuja." "Lohikrmeen aivoissa on
jalokivi", kertoo Philostratus, ja "nyttmll kultaisia kirjaimia ja
punaista vaatetta" saapi hirvin horroksiin ja voi helposti sen tappaa.
Suuri alkemisti, Pierre de Boniface, vitti ett jalokivi voi tehd
ihmisen nkymttmksi, ja indialainen agaati antoi hnelle kaunopuheen
lahjan. Karneoli asetti vihan, hyasintti tuotti unta ja ametisti poisti
viininhyryt. Granaatti karkoitti demonit ja hidropicus hvitti kuun
vrin. Seleniitti suureni ja pieneni kuun mukana, ja meloceus, joka
antoi ilmi varkaita, saattoi tahrautua vain vohlan verest. Leonardus
Camillus oli nhnyt miten valkea kivi, joka oli otettu vastatapetun
sammakon aivoista, oli varmana keinona myrkytyst vastaan. Bezoari, joka
oli lydetty arabialaisen metskauriin sydmest, oli noitakonsti ruttoa
vastaan. Arabialaisten lintujen pesiss oli aspilateja, jotka
Demokritoksen mukaan suojelivat tulenvaaraa vastaan.

Ceilanin kuningas ratsasti kruunausjuhlassaan pkaupunkinsa lpi suuri
punainen rubiini kdessn. John the Priestin palatsin portit olivat
"tehdyt sardeista ja silatut sarvipisten krmeitten sarvilla, jottei
kukaan voisi tuoda myrkky mukanansa." Pdyn ylpuolella oli "kaksi
kultaista omenaa, joissa kimalteli kaksi kiiltokive", jotta kulta
kiiltisi pivll ja kiiltokivet yll. Lodgen ihmeellisess
kertomuksessa "A Margarite of America" vitettiin, ett kuningattaren
kamarissa saattoi nhd kaikki maailman sivet naiset hopeaan taottuina
ja peilaillen itsen kauniihin kuvastimiin, jotka olivat tehdyt
krysoliiteista, kiiltokivist, safireista ja vihreist smaragdeista.
Marco Polo oli nhnyt Zipangun asukkaiden panevan ruusunpunaisia helmi
kuolleitten suuhun. Merihirvi, joka oli ollut rakastunut helmeen, mink
sukeltaja toi kuningas Perozekselle, oli tappanut varkaan ja surrut
helme seitsemn kuukautta. Kun hunnit houkuttelivat kuninkaan ansaan,
niin hn heitti pois helmen -- siten Prokopios kertoo -- eik sit
koskaan lydetty, vaikka keisari Anastasius uhrasi viisisataa puntaa
kultaa sen etsimist varten. Malabarin kuningas oli nyttnyt erlle
venetsialaiselle rukousnauhan, jossa oli kolmesataanelj helme, helmi
kutakin jumalaa varten, jota hn palveli.

Kun Valentinoisin herttua, Alexander VI:nnen poika, oli kymss Ranskan
Ludvig XII:nnen luona, niin hnen hevosensa oli Brantmen kertomuksen
mukaan, koristettu kultalaatoilla, ja hnen hatussaan oli kaksi rivi
kimaltelevia rubiineja. Englannin Kaarlo kytti jalustimia, joissa oli
neljsataakaksikymmentyksi jalokive. Rikhard II:lla oli vaippa, joka
oli kolmenkymmenentuhannen markan arvoinen, ja joka oli tynn
rubiineja. Hall kuvailee Henrik VIII:tta, kun hn kulki Towerin
kruunausjuhlaan, seuraavalla tavalla: hnell oli "kohokultainen takki,
jonka etukappaleet olivat koristetut timanteilla ja muilla hohtokivill
ja olkavy oli suurista rubiineista." Jaakko I:n suosikit kyttivt
kultafiligrani korvarenkaita, joihin oli kiinnitetty smaragdeja. Edward
II antoi Piers Gavestonille punakultaisen varustuksen, joka oli
koristettu hyasinteilla, kultaruusuista tehdyt kaulaketjut, joissa oli
turkoseja, ja kyprin, joka oli tyteen siroteltu helmi. Henrik II
kytti jalokivill koristettuja hansikoita, jotka ylettyivt
kyynrphn asti, ja hnell oli haukkahansikas, johon oli kirjaeltu
kaksitoista rubiinia ja viisikymmentkaksi kallista helme. Kaarle
rohkealla, Burgundin herttualla, sukunsa viimeisell, oli kruunu, jossa
oli prynnmuotoisia helmi ja safiireja.

Kuinka erinomainen elm oli ennen ollut! Kuinka loistava prameudessaan
ja komeudessaan! Olipa ihmeellist vain lukeakin manalle menneiden
loistosta.

Sitten hnen huomionsa kntyi koruompeluihin ja seinverhoihin, jotka
Europan pohjoisten kansojen kylmiss huoneissa korvaavat
freskomaalauksia. Kun hn syventyi thn alaan -- hnell oli aina
tavaton kyky antautua kokonaan siihen, mik sill hetkell kiehtoi hnen
huomiotansa -- niin hn tuli melkein alakuloiseksi ajatellessaan kuinka
paljon kaunista ja ihmeellist aika oli turmellut. Hn itse ainakin oli
pelastunut. Kes seurasi toistansa, keltaiset narsissit kukkivat ja
kuihtuivat yh uudestaan, ja kauhua herttvien itten hpelliset
tapahtumat uudistuivat yh, hn yksin ei muuttunut. Talvi ei uurtanut
hnen kasvojansa eik hvittnyt hnen kukkamaista kauneuttansa. Miten
toisin oli aineellisten esineiden laita! Minne ne olivat joutuneet?
Miss oli se suuri krokusvrinen vaippa, jossa jumalat olivat
taistelleet jttilisi vastaan ja jonka tummat tytt olivat kutoneet
Athenen iloksi? Minne oli joutunut tuo suunnaton telttakatto, jonka Nero
oli pingoittanut Colosseumin yli Roomassa, tuo titaninen purppurapurje,
johon thtitaivas oli kuvattuna ja Apollo ajavana vaunuissaan, joita
kultavaljaiset valkoiset varsat vetivt? Hn olisi halunnut nhd
auringonpappien ihmeellisi pytliinoja, joille katettiin kaikki
juhlaherkut ja metsnriistat; kuningas Chilperikin hikiliinan ja sen
kolmesataa kultaista mehilist; ne eriskummalliset puvut, jotka
herttivt Pontuksen piispan paheksumista, ja joihin oli kirjaeltu
"jalopeuroja, panttereita, karhuja, koiria, metsi, kallioita,
metsstji -- kaikkea, mit maalari voi luonnosta kuvata;" sen vaipan,
jota Kaarlo Orleansilainen kytti vain yhden ainoan kerran, ja jonka
hihoihin oli kirjaeltu ern laulun skeet, joka alkaa seuraavilla
sanoilla: "_Madame, je suis tout joyeux_;" sanojen sestys oli kirjaeltu
kultalangalla ja jokainen neliskulmainen nuotti, niinkuin siihen aikaan
kytettiin, oli muodostettu neljst helmest. Hn luki kuningatar
Johanna Burgundilaisen huoneesta Rheimsin palatsissa, jossa oli
"kolmetoistasataa kaksikymmentyksi kirjaeltua papukaijaa, joita koristi
kuninkaan vaakunat, sek viisisataa kuusikymmentyksi perhosta, joiden
siipi samaan tapaan kaunisti kuningattaren vaakunat, kaikki kullalla
kirjaeltuna." Katarina Medicilinen oli antanut valmistaa itselleen
suruvuoteen mustasta sametista, joka oli koristettu puolikuilla ja
auringoilla. Sen uutimet olivat damastia, jonka kulta- ja hopeapohjalle
oli kudottu lehtiseppeleit ja kiehkuroita, ja jonka reunat olivat
helmill kirjaellut. Se seisoi huoneessa, jonka kattolistaan
kuningattaren mielilauseet olivat piirretyt mustilla samettikirjaimilla
hopeapinnalle. Ludvig XIV:nnell oli huoneustossaan viisitoista jalkaa
korkeita, kultakirjaisia kariatideja. Puolan kuninkaan, Sobieskin,
juhlavuode oli tehty smyrnalaisesta kultabrokadista ja siihen oli
kirjaeltu turkoseilla skeit koranista. Sen kannattimet olivat
kullattua, taottua hopeaa, ja tynn emalji- ja hohtokivi-medaljongeja.
Se oli rystetty turkkilaisesta leirist Wienin edustalla ja Mahomedin
lippu oli seisonut sen vrhtelevn kultaisen baldakinin alla.

Kokonaisen vuoden hn kokoili mit ihmeellisimpi kutoma- ja
koruompeluteoksia. Hn hankki itselleen pehmeit musliineja Delhist,
joihin oli kudottu kultalankaisia palmunlehti ja sateenkaarenvrisi
kovakuoriaisten siipi; dacca-harsokankaita, joita itmailla niiden
lpinkyvisyyden vuoksi nimitetn "kudotuksi ilmaksi", "juoksevaksi
vedeksi" ja "iltakasteeksi;" eriskummallisenkuosisia javalaisia
kankaita; taiteellisia, keltaisia, kiinalaisia uutimia; ruskeihin tai
vaaleansinisiin silkkikansiin sidottuja kirjoja, joiden kansilla oli
_fleurs de lys-_, lintu- tai epjumalankoristeita; unkarilaisia
pitsihuntuja; sisilialaisia brokadeja ja espanjalaisia sametteja;
georgianilaisia kultarahakoruja ja vihertvn kultaan vivahtavia
japanilaisia _foukousas_ kankaita, koreine kudottuine lintuineen.

Erityisesti hn harrasti mys papillisia pukuja ja kaikkea, mik
kuului jumalanpalvelukseen. Pitkiss setripuuarkuissa talonsa
vasemmanpuolisella gallerialla hn silytti paljon harvinaisia esineit,
kylliksi komeita Kristuksen morsianta varten, jonka tuli kytt hienoa
liinaa, purppuraa ja jalokivi peittkseen kalpeata, kiusattua,
krsimyksist ja itsekidutuksista murtunutta ruumista. Hnell oli komea
messupuku punaisesta silkist ja kultakuteisesta damastista, joka oli
kirjaeltu kultaisilla granaattiomenilla ja stiliseeratuilla kukilla ja
jonka molempiin reunoihin oli hiekkahelmill ommeltu ananasin kuva.
Kaavun nauhat olivat jaetut eri pintoihin, jotka esittivt kohtauksia
Neitsyt Maarian elmst, ja Neitsyen kruunaus oli kirjaeltu silkill
hiippaan. Se oli italialaista tekoa viidennelttoista vuosisadalta.
Toinen kaapu oli vihre samettia, ja siihen oli kirjaeltu
sydmenmuotoisia akantus-lehti, joista lksi hopeasta ja kirjavasta
kristallista tehtyj pitkvartisia, valkoisia kukkia. Soljessa oli
kultainen serafin p. Nauhat olivat punakukkaista ja keltaista silkki
ja niihin oli kiinnitetty pyhimysten ja martyyrien medaljongeja, muun
muassa Pyhn Sebastianinkin. Dorianilla oli mys merenkullan vrisest
ja sinisest silkist, kultabrokadista, keltaisesta silkkidamastista ja
kultakankaasta tehtyj messukasukkoja, joihin oli kirjaeltu kohtauksia
krsimyksenhistoriasta ja ristiinnaulitsemisesta, sek jalopeuroja,
riikinkukkoja ja muita vertauskuvia; messupaitoja valkeasta silkist ja
punaisesta silkkidamastista, joissa oli tulpaaneja, delfinej ja _fleurs
de lys_-koristeita; alttariliinoja punaisesta sametista ja sinisest
liinasta; sek useita kalkki- ja hikiliinoja. Nuo salaperiset menot,
joita varten kaikki nmt esineet olivat aiotut, kiihottivat hnen
mielikuvitustansa.

Sill kaikki nmt aarteet, samoinkuin kaikki muukin, mit hn kokoili
kauniisen kotiinsa, olivat hnelle vain unohduksen vlikappaleita,
keinoja joiden avulla hn hetkeksi saattoi irtautua siit taakasta, joka
usein oli kyd hnelle liian raskaaksi kantaa. Yksinisess, suljetussa
huoneessa, jossa hn oli viettnyt suurimman osan nuoruuttansa, hn itse
oli ripustanut seinlle tuon hirven kuvan, jonka muuttuneet piirteet
olivat hnen elmns todellisen alennuksen todistuksena, ja kuvan
ylpuolelle hn oli asettanut laskoksille kullanpunertavan peitteen.
Viikkokausiin hn ei kynyt siell ja unohti silloin koko julman
maalauksen, ja hnen mielens tuli jlleen kevyeksi, entinen iloisuus
palasi takaisin ja hn eli kokonaan hetkess. Mutta kki, jonakuna
iltana hn saattoi hiipi ulos talosta, lhte noihin hirveihin
seutuihin lhelle Blue-gate-fieldi ja viipy siell pivkausia, kunnes
hn ajettiin pois. Takaisin tultuaan hn istahti kuvan eteen, ja tunsi
usein inhoa sek sit ett itsens kohtaan, mutta toisin ajoin hnet
valtasi taas itserakkauden ylpeys, jossa puolittain synnin lumous
piilee. Ja hn hymyili salaisella ilolla turmeltuneelle varjokuvalle,
jonka tytyi kantaa sit kuormaa, joka oli aiottu hnt itsen varten.

Muutamien vuosien kuluttua hn ei voinut en pitkksi aikaa poistua
Englannista. Hn luopui huvilasta, joka hnell ja lordi Henryll oli
ollut Trouvillessa, samoinkuin pienest valkoseinisest talosta
Algierissa, jossa he olivat viettneet useita talvia yhdess. Hn ei
voinut olla erilln muotokuvasta, joka muodosti niin trken osan hnen
elmns, ja hn pelksi myskin, ett hnen poissaollessansa joku
voisi pst huoneesen, jos kohta hn olikin antanut panna vahvat teljet
oven eteen.

Hn tiesi kyll, ettei kuva voisi kertoa kellekn mitn. Tosin kuva
oli vielkin hyvin hnen muotoisensa, vaikka se oli tullutkin inhottavan
rumaksi. Mutta mit muut siit ymmrtisivt? Hn nauraisi heille, jos
he uskaltaisivat hvist hnt. Eihn hn ollut maalannut sit. Mit se
hnt liikutti jos se nyttikin rumalta ja hpelliselt? Vaikka hn
heille kertoisikin, niin tokkopa he uskoisivat?

Mutta sittenkin hn pelksi. Joskus kun hn piti pitoja suuressa
talossaan Nottinghamshiressa nuorille, hienoille styveljilleen, joiden
seurassa hn pasiallisesti liikkui, ja hmmstytti koko kreivikuntaa
hurjalla ylellisyydelln ja mielettmll tuhlaavaisuudellaan, hn
saattoi kki jtt vieraansa ja kiiruhtaa takaisin kaupunkiin
katsoaksensa eik ovea oltu murrettu ja oliko taulu viel paikoillansa.
Mitp jos se varastettaisiin? Yksin tuo ajatuskin sai hnet kauhusta
jtymn. Silloin maailma varmaan psisi hnen salaisuutensa perille.
Ehkp maailma sit jo epilikin.

Sill jos kohta hn lumosi useita, niin olipa niitkin, jotka eivt
luottaneet hneen. Vhll ettei hnt olisi arvottu pois erst West
End-klubista, johon hnell oli yhteiskunnallisen asemansa ja
sukuperns nojalla tysi oikeus kuulua, ja kerrottiin, ett kun hn
kerran ern ystvn seurassa tuli Churchill-klubin tupakkahuoneesen,
niin Berwickin herttua ja ers toinen herra menivt uhallaan ulos
huoneesta. Kummallisia juttuja levisi hnest, kun hn oli tyttnyt
viisikolmatta vuotta. Huhu kertoi, ett hnet oli nhty ulkomaalaisten
merimiesten seurassa huonossa kapakassa Whitechapelin puolella, ja ett
hn seurusteli varkaitten ja rahanvrentjien kanssa ja oli pssyt
heidn ammattinsa salaisuuksien perille. Hnen ihmeelliset matkansa
tulivat tunnetuiksi, ja kun hn nyttytyi jlleen seuroissa, niin
herrat kuiskailivat nurkissa keskenns tai astuivat hnen ohitsensa
pilkallisesti hymyillen, tai katselivat hnt kylmsti ja tutkivasti,
iknkuin he olisivat pttneet ottaa selville hnen salaisuutensa.

Tuollaista hvyttmyytt ja tahallista halveksumista hn tietysti ei
ollut huomaavinaan, ja useimmat arvelivat, ett hnen suora, vilpitn
olentonsa, hnen miellyttv, poikamainen hymyilyns ja hnen suloinen
nuorekas ulkomuotonsa, joka ei koskaan nyttnyt vanhenevan, olisi
itsessn tyydyttvn vastauksena siihen panetteluun -- sill
panetteluksi sit sanottiin -- jonka alaiseksi hn oli joutunut.
Huomattiin kuitenkin, ett muutamat, jotka olivat olleet hnen lhimpi
ystvins, alkoivat jonkun ajan kuluttua karttaa hnt. Naiset, jotka
olivat kiihkesti ihailleet hnt ja hnen thtens uhmailleet sek
yhteiskunnallisia tapoja ett sopivaisuutta, kalpenivat hpest ja
kauhusta, jos Dorian Gray astui huoneesen.

Mutta monen silmiss nuo salavihkaa kerrotut hvistysjutut lissivt
vain hnen ihmeellist ja vaarallista viehtysvoimaansa. Hnen suuri
rikkautensa oli hnell varmana turvana. Yhteiskunta, ainakin sivistynyt
yhteiskunta, ei mielelln usko mitn pahaa niist, jotka ovat sek
rikkaita ett miellyttvi. Ihmiset tuntevat vaistomaisesti, ett
kytstapa on trkempi kuin moraali, ja heidn mielestn rehellisyys
on vhemmn arvoinen kuin hyv kokki. Ja tosiaankin on hyvin vhn
lohdullista jos sanotaan, ett mies, joka on tarjonnut meille huonon
pivllisen tai huonoja viinej, viett moitteetonta yksityiselm.
Eivt edes kardinaalihyveetkn voi puolustaa puolikylmi vliruokia,
niinkuin lordi Henry kerran huomautti, kun tst kysymyksest
keskusteltiin; eik tt hnen mielipidettns vastaan voi paljon sanoa.
Sill seuraelmn snnt ovat, tai ainakin niiden pitisi olla, samat
kuin taiteenkin. Muoto on pasia. Siin tulee olla seremonian
arvokkaisuutta ja eptodellisuutta ja samalla sen tulee yhdist
itseens romantisen nytelmn eptodellinen luonne sek se nerokkuus ja
kauneus, joka tekee nytnnn nautintorikkaaksi. Onko teeskentely
jotakin niin hirvittv? Enp usko. Se on pikemmin vain keino, jonka
avulla meidn personallisuutemme monistuu.

Se oli ainakin Dorian Grayn mielipide. Hn ihmetteli sit pintapuolista
psykologiaa, jonka mukaan ihmisen minuus on jotakin yksinkertaista,
pysyv, luotettavaa ja yhtenist. Hnen mielestn ihminen oli olento,
jolla oli lukemattoman monta elm ja lukemattomia tunteita,
monipuolinen olento, jonka sielussa oli ihmeellisi perittyj ajatuksia
ja intohimoja ja jonka ruumis oli saastutettu vainajien kauheilla
taudeilla. Hn kuljeskeli mielelln kylmss, autiossa taulugalleriassa
maatilallaan ja katseli niiden erilaisten henkiliden muotokuvia, joiden
veri hnen suonissaan virtaili. Siin oli Philip Herbert, josta Francis
Osborne sanoo "Muistelmissaan kuningatar Elisabethin ja kuningas Jaakon
ajoilta", ett hnt "hemmoteltiin hovissa kauniin ulkomuotonsa vuoksi,
joka ei kuitenkaan kauan kestnyt." Elik hn ehk joskus nuoren
Herbertin elm? Oliko joku kummallinen, myrkyllinen itu kulkenut
ruumiista ruumiisen, kunnes se oli tavannut hnet? Olikohan joku hmr
tunne tuosta kadonneesta kauneudesta vaikuttanut sen, ett hn niin
kki, ilman mitn syyt, oli Basil Hallwardin atelierissa lausunut sen
mielettmn toivomuksen, joka oli muuttanut kokonaan hnen elmns?
Tuossa, punaisessa, kultakirjaisessa kaavussaan, jalokivill
koristetussa asetakissaan, kultaripsinen ryhelys kaulassaan ja
kalvosimet ranteillaan seisoi sir Anthony Sherard, raskas hopeavarustus
jalkojensa juuressa. Mit tuo mies oli hnelle perinnksi jttnyt?
Olisiko hn kuningatar Johanna Neapelilaisen rakastajana antanut hnelle
perintn synti ja hpe? Olivatko hnen tekonsa vain unelmia, joita
tuo vainaja ei ollut uskaltanut toteuttaa? Tuossa, kalvenneesta
kankaasta hymyili lady Elizabeth Devereux; hnell oli harsophine
pss, helmill kirjaeltu huivi kaulassa ja avonaiset, vaaleanpunaiset
hiat. Pydll hnen vieressn oli mandoliini ja omena. Hnen pieni,
suippokrkisi kenkin koristi suuret vihret nauharuusut. Dorian tunsi
hnen elmntarinansa ja ihmeelliset jutut, joita kerrottiin hnen
rakastajistansa. Oliko hn perinyt jotakin hnenkin luonnonlaadustansa?
Nuo soikeat silmt nyttivt tarkastelevan hnt uteliaasti raskaitten
silmluomiensa alta. Ents George Willoughby, jolla oli jauhoitetut
hiukset ja kauneustpli kasvoissaan? Kuinka ilkelt hn nytti! Kasvot
olivat synkt ja mustat, ja halveksiva piirre nytti karehtivan
aistillisten huulien ymprill. Hienot pitsikalvosimet valuivat alas
laihoille, kellertville ksille, jotka olivat tynn sormuksia. Hn oli
ollut suurimpia keikareita kahdeksannellatoista vuosisadalla, ja
nuoruudessaan lordi Ferrarin ystv. Ent toinen Beckenhamin lordi, joka
oli ollut hallitsijaprinssin hurjistelutoverina ja mrs. Fitzherbertin
salaisen avioliiton todistajana? Miten uljaalta ja kauniilta hn nytti
kopeassa asennossaan, phkinnruskeine kiharoineen! Mit intohimoja hn
oli jttnyt perinnksi? Maailman silmiss hn oli ollut kunniaton. Hn
oli johtanut Carlton-Housen orgioita. Sukkanauharitariston thti kiilsi
hnen rinnassansa. Hnen vieressn riippui hnen puolisonsa muotokuva,
kalpea, ohuthuulinen, mustapukuinen nainen. Hnenkin verens virtasi
Dorianin suonissa. Kuinka kummalliselta kaikki tuntui! Ja Dorianin iti,
joka muistutti lady Hamiltonia, iti, jolla oli kosteat, viininpunaiset
huulet, -- hn tiesi kyll mit hn hnelt oli perinyt. Hn oli perinyt
hnelt kauneutensa ja kauneudenihailunsa. idin kuva hymyili hnelle
vljss bakhantinnapuvussaan. Hnen hiuksissaan oli viininlehvi.
Purppurainen viini kuohui pikarin reunojen yli, jota hn piteli
kdessn. Kuvan ihonvri oli vaalennut, mutta silmt olivat yh
ihmeellisen syvt ja loistavat vriltn. Ne nyttivt seuraavan hnt
minne tahansa hn kulki.

Mutta kirjallisuudessakin voi lyt edellkvijitns yht hyvin kuin
omassa suvussansa, ja ne ehk tyypiltn ja temperamentiltaan ovat
vielkin lheisempi, ainakin muutamat, ja niiden vaikutus paljoa
itsetiedollisempi. Ajoittain Dorian Grayst tuntui ett koko historia
oli vain kertomusta hnen omasta elmstns, ei sellaista, jota hn
itse todellisuudessa oli elnyt, vaan jommoiseksi hnen
mielikuvituksensa oli sen luonut ja hnen aivonsa ja intohimonsa sen
loihtinut. Hn oli mielestn tuntenut heidt kaikki, nuo omituiset,
julmat henkilt, jotka olivat kulkeneet maailman nyttmn yli, tehneet
synnin niin hurmaavaksi ja pahuuden viehttvksi. Hnest tuntui,
iknkuin jollakin salaperisell tavalla heidn elmns olisi ollut
hnen omaansa.

Sankarilla siin ihmeellisess kirjassa, joka oli niin voimakkaasti
vaikuttanut hneen, oli myskin ollut samanlaisia merkillisi
kuvitteluja. Seitsemnness luvussa hn kertoo, miten hn laakeriseppele
pss, jotta salama ei iskisi hneen, istui Tiberiuksen puutarhassa
Caprin saarella ja luki Elephantiksen hpellisi kirjoja, samalla kuin
kpit ja riikinkukot pyrivt hnen ymprilln ja huilunsoittaja
laski leikki suitsutusastian heiluttajan kanssa; Caligulana hn oli
pitnyt juominkeja vihretakkisten ratsupalvelijoiden kanssa tallissa ja
synyt illallista norsunluisesta seimest yhdess hevosen kanssa, jolla
oli hohtokivinen otsanauha; Domitianuksena hn oli vaeltanut kytv
pitkin, jonka seinill riippui marmorikuvastimia, ja kuoppaisin silmin
hn oli etsinyt sen tikarin kuvainta, jonka oli mr lopettaa hnen
elmns, sairaassa mielessn tuo elmnkyllstyminen, tuo hirve
_taedium vitae_, joka valtaa ne ihmiset, joilta elm ei mitn
kiell; hn oli istunut sirkuksessa ja katsellut kirkkaan smaragdin lpi
verist ihmisteurastusta ja antanut sitten hopeakenkisten muulien
kantaa itsen helmist ja purppurasta tehdyss kantotuolissa
Granaattiomena-katua pitkin kultaiseen taloon, miss hn kuuli ihmisten
huutavan Caesar Neroa, kun tm kulki ohitse; ja Heliogabaluksena hn
oli maalannut kasvojaan ja kehrnnyt yhdess naisten kanssa ja tuonut
kuun Karthagosta ja naittanut hnet salaisesti auringon kanssa.

Yh uudestaan ja uudestaan Dorian luki tt eriskummallista lukua sek
molempia sit seuraavia, joissa, samoinkuin harvinaisissa seinverhoissa
tai taidokkaissa emaljikuvissa, oli kuvattuna ne hirvet ja kauniit
olennot, jotka pahe ja veri ja tyttmyys oli muuttanut hirviiksi
ja hulluiksi. Siin oli kuvattuna Filippo, Milanon herttua, joka
murhasi vaimonsa ja maalasi hnen huulensa punaisella myrkyll,
jotta hnen rakastajansa imisi kuoleman suudellessaan hnt; Pietro
Barbi, venetsialainen, tunnettu Paul toisen nimell, joka
turhamaisuudessaan koetti omistaa itselleen _formosus_ arvonimen ja
jonka kahdensadantuhannen floriinin arvoinen hiippa ostettiin hirven
synnin hinnalla; Gian Maria Visconti, joka koirilla metssti elvi
ihmisi, ja jonka murhatun ruumiin peitti ruusuilla ers hetri, joka
hnt oli rakastanut; Borgia valkoisen hevosensa selss, ja hnen
rinnallansa ratsastamassa veljenmurha, vaippa Perotton veress; Pietro
Riario, Firenzen nuori kardinaali-arkkipiispa, Sixtus IV:nnen poika ja
suosikki, jonka kauneutta saattoi verrata vain hnen kevytmieliseen
elmns ja joka vastaanotti Leonora Aragonialaisen valkoisen ja
punaisen kirjavassa, merenneitoja ja kentaureja tynn olevassa
silkkiteltassa, ja joka antoi kullata pojan, jotta tm tarjotessansa
juhlassa nyttisi Ganymedeelta tai Hylaalta; Ezzelino, jonka
alakuloisuutta eivt mitkn muut kuin kuolemannytkset haihduttaneet,
ja joka joi punaista verta samoinkuin muut punaista viini -- sanottiin
ett hn oli perkeleen poika ja oli pettnyt isns noppapeliss
pelatessaan omasta sielustansa; Giambattista Cibo, joka pilallaan
kutsutti itsen "viattomaksi" ja jonka kuivuneihin suoniin ers
juutalainen lkri ruiskutti kolmen nuorukaisen verta; Sigismondo
Malatesta, Isottan rakastaja ja Riminin herra, jonka kuva poltettiin
Roomassa Jumalan ja ihmisten vihollisena, hn, joka kuristi salvetilla
Polyssenan, antoi myrkky Ginevra d'Estelle smaragdipikarista ja
rakennutti hpellisen intohimon kunniaksi pakanallisen temppelin, jossa
kristillist jumalanpalvelusta oli pidettv; Kaarlo VI, joka ihaili
niin hurjasti veljens vaimoa, ett ers spitalitautinen varoitti hnt
siit mielenhirist, jonka uhriksi hn oli joutuva, ja jota hnen
aivojensa hmmennytty ei rauhoittanut mikn muu kuin sarasenilaiset
kortit, joihin oli maalattu rakkautta, kuolemaa ja hulluutta esittvi
kuvia; ja Grifonetto Baglioni koristellussa takissaan, jalokiviphine
akantusmaisilla kiharoillaan, joka murhasi Astorren ja hnen morsiamensa
sek Simonetton ja tmn paashin, ja joka oli niin kaunis, ett kun hn
makasi henkitoreissaan keltaisella torilla Perugiassa, nekin jotka
olivat vihanneet hnt, eivt voineet olla itkemtt ja Atalantakin,
joka oli kironnut hnet, siunasi hnt.

Noissa kaikissa oli retn lumousvoima. Hn nki ne isin edessn, ja
pivin ne hmmensivt hnen mielikuvitustaan. Renessansiaika tunsi monia
myrkytyskeinoja -- myrkyttvi kypreit ja palavia vahakynttilit,
kirjaeltuja hansikoita ja jalokivill koristettuja viuhkoja, kullattuja
hajurasioita ja merenkultavitjoja. Dorian Gray oli saanut myrkytyst
kirjasta. Ajoittain hn luuli, ett pahuus oli ainoa keino, jonka
vlityksell hn saattoi toteuttaa kauneudenunelmansa.




LUKU XII.


Oli marraskuun yhdekss piv, hnen kahdeksannenneljtt
syntympivns aatto, niinkuin hn jlkeenpin usein muisteli.

Hn astui kotiin kello yhdentoista aikana lordi Henryn luota, jossa hn
oli ollut pivllisill, ja ylln hnell oli raskas turkki, sill ilta
oli kylm ja sumuinen. Grosvenor squaren ja South Audley Streetin
kulmassa ers mies astui hyvin nopeasti hnen ohitsensa sumussa, harmaa
ulsterikaulus nostettuna korville. Hnell oli matkalaukku kdess.
Dorian tunsi hnet. Se oli Basil Hallward. Hnet valtasi omituinen
pelontunne, jota hnen oli mahdoton selitt. Hn ei ollut nkevinns
hnt ja kulki nopeasti taloansa kohti.

Mutta Hallward oli huomannut hnet. Dorian kuuli ett hn ensin pyshtyi
katukytvll ja sitten kiiruhti hnen jlkeens. Hetken kuluttua hn
laski ktens Dorianin olkaplle.

"Dorian! Mik mainio sattuma! Olen odottanut sinua kirjastossasi aina
kello yhdeksst saakka. Vihdoin minun tuli sli sinun vsynytt
palvelijaasi ja kskin hnen menn levolle, kun hn psti minut ulos.
Min lhden Parisiin yjunalla ja min tahdoin niin mielellni tavata
sinua ennen lhtni. Min luulin tuntevani sinut, tai ainakin turkkisi,
kun astuit minun ohitseni. En ollut kuitenkaan aivan varma. Etk sin
tuntenut minua?"

"Tss sumussako, rakas Basil? Tuskin tunsin Grosvenor squarea. Jossakin
tllpin minun asuntoni on, mutta en ole varma siit. Olen pahoillani
ett lhdet pois, enhn ole tavannut sinua iankaikkisiin aikoihin. Mutta
toivottavasti tulet pian takaisin?"

"En niinkn pian. Aion viipy poissa kuusi kuukautta. Hyyrn itselleni
atelierin Parisissa ja pysyn piilossa kunnes olen saanut valmiiksi
suuren taulun, joka pyrii pssni. Mutta aikomukseni ei ollut puhua
itsestni. Olemme sinun ovellasi. Salli minun tulla hetkeksi sisn.
Minulla on sinulle jotakin sanottavaa."

"Sep hauska. Mutta etk myhsty junastasi?" sanoi Dorian Gray
vlinpitmttmsti, astuessaan yls portaita ja avatessaan oven
avaimellaan.

Lampunvalo lekotteli sumun lpi ja Hallward katsoi kelloaan. "Minulla on
paljon aikaa", vastasi hn. "Juna lhtee vasta neljnnest yli
kaksitoista, ja kello on nyt juuri yksitoista. Min olinkin menossa
klubiin sinua etsimn, kun tapasin sinut. Minulla ei ole vaivaa
tavaroistakaan, sill lhetin jo edeltpin matka-arkkuni. Minulla ei
ole muuta kuin tm ksilaukku matkassani ja kahdessakymmeness
minuutissa ehdin hyvin Viktoria-asemalle."

Dorian katseli hnt hymyillen. "Sill tavalla hieno maalari matkustaa!
Gladstone-laukku kdess ja ulsterikaulus takissa! Tule sisn, jottei
sumu tunkeudu sisn. lk huoli puhua mitn vakavata. Ei mikn
nykyn ole vakavaa. Ei ainakaan minkn tulisi olla."

Hallward pudisti ptn astuessaan sisn ja seurasi Doriania
kirjastoon. Kirkas tuli paloi suuressa takassa. Lamput olivat sytytetyt,
ja pienell mosaikipydll seisoi muutamia pulloja soodavett ja
suuria, hiottuja laseja.

"Sin net miten kodikasta minulla tll oli, Dorian. Sinun palvelijasi
antoi minulle kaikkea mit min tarvitsin, vielp sinun parhaita,
kultapisi paperossejasi. Hn on hyvin vieraanvarainen olento. Min
pidn hnest paljoa enemmn kuin ranskalaisesta, joka sinulla oli
ennen. Mihink tuo ranskalainen oikeastaan joutui?"

Dorian kohautti olkapitn. "Luullakseni hn nai lady Radleyn
kamarineidon ja on asettunut Parisiin englantilaiseksi rtliksi.
Englantilaisuus kuuluu olevan siell hyvin muodissa. Siin suhteessa
ranskalaiset ovat lapsellisia, eik totta? Mutta tiedtks -- hn ei
ollut mikn huono palvelija. Min en pitnyt hnest, mutta minulla ei
ollut syyt moittia hnt mistn. Ihminen kuvittelee niin usein
mielessn aivan mahdottomia asioita. Hn oli hyvin kiintynyt minuun ja
nytti olevan hyvin suruissaan kun hn lksi. Tahdotko lisn konjakkia
ja soodaa? Vai haluatko mielemmin hochheimeri seltterin kanssa. Min
juon aina hochheimeri. Viereisess huoneessa on sit varmaan."

"Kiitos, en huoli en mitn", sanoi maalari riisuen yltn
pllystakin ja hatun ja heitten ne laukkunsa plle, jonka hn oli
asettanut nurkkaan. "Ja nyt, rakas ystv, tahtoisin puhua sinun
kanssasi vakavasti. l rypist noin kulmakarvojasi. Sitten minun on
niin paljoa vaikeampi puhua."

"Mit asia koskee?" kysyi Dorian krsimttmsti, heittytyen sohvalle.
"Toivottavasti se ei koske minua itseni. Olen vsynyt itseeni tn
iltana. Tahtoisin olla joku muu."

"Se koskee juuri sinua", vastasi Hallward vakavalla, syvll nelln,
"ja minun tytyy sanoa se sinulle. En pidt sinua kuin puolen tuntia."

Dorian huokasi ja sytytti paperossin. "Puolen tuntia!" hn mutisi.

"En min vaadi suuria sinulta, Dorian, ja sinun itsesi thden min
puhun. Min arvelen parhaaksi ett saat tiet ett sinusta kerrotaan
kauhistuttavia asioita Lontoossa."

"En min huoli tiet niist mitn. Minusta on hauska kuulla
hvistysjuttuja muista, mutta hvistysjutut minusta itsestni eivt
huvita minua. Niiss ei ole uutuuden viehtyst."

"Niiden tytyy huvittaa sinua, Dorian. Jokainen gentleman on arka
hyvst nimestn. Sin et tahdo ett ihmiset puhuisivat sinusta pahaa
ja halpamaista. Tietysti sinulla on asemasi ja rikkautesi, ja kaikkea
muuta sellaista. Mutta asema ja rikkaus ei ole kaikkea. l unohda,
etten min usko nihin huhuihin. Ainakaan en voi uskoa niihin, kun nen
sinut. Synti jtt jlkens ihmisen kasvoihin. Sit ei voi salata.
Ihmiset puhuvat joskus salaisista paheista. Sellaista ei ole olemassa.
Jos huono ihminen on vajonnut paheesen, niin piirteet hnen suunsa
ymprill, silmluomien velttous ja ksienkin muoto voi sen ilmaista.
Ers henkil -- en tahdo mainita hnen nimens, mutta sin tunnet hnet
kyll -- pyysi viime vuonna minua maalaamaan hnen kuvansa. En ollut
koskaan ennen nhnyt hnt, enk viel silloin ollut kuullut hnest
mitn, vaikka nyt jo tiedn hyvn joukon. Hn tarjosi tavattoman suurta
hintaa. Mutta min kieltydyin. Hnen sormiensa muodossa oli jotakin,
jota en voinut siet. Nyt tiedn ett minun epilykseni olivat aivan
oikeat. Hn viett hirve elm. Mutta sin, Dorian, sinun kasvosi
ovat puhtaat, viattomat ja kirkkaat ja sinun nuoruutesi on niin
ihmeellisen koskematon -- sinusta en voi mitn pahaa uskoa. Ja
kuitenkin min tapaan sinua niin harvoin, et tule en koskaan minun
atelieriini, ja kun en ne sinua ja kuulen kaikki nuo hirvet jutut,
joita ihmiset sinusta kuiskailevat, niin en tied mit sanoa. Mink
vuoksi, Dorian, sellainen mies kuin Berwickin herttua, poistuu
klubihuoneesta, kun sin astut sisn? Miksi niin useat Lontoon
gentlemaneista eivt tahdo tulla sinun taloosi, eivtk kutsu sinua
luoksensa? Olithan ennen lordi Staveleyn hyv ystv. Tapasin hnet
viime viikolla pivllisill. Sinun nimesi mainittiin keskustelussa kun
tuli puhe niist miniatyyreist, joita olet lainannut Dudleyn
nyttelyyn. Staveley kohautti huultaan ja sanoi ett sinulla ehk on
hyvinkin taiteellinen aisti, mutta ettei pitisi sallia kenenkn
puhdasmielisen tytn tutustua sinuun eik antaa hyvmaineisen naisen
olla samassa huoneessa sinun kanssasi. Min sanoin hnelle ett olin
sinun ystvsi, ja kysyin mit hn tarkoitti. Hn sanoi sen minulle. Hn
sanoi sen suoraan kaikkien kuullen. Se oli hirve! Miksi sinun
ystvyytesi tuottaa turmiota kaikille nuorille miehille? Esimerkiksi tuo
poika raukka kaartissa, joka teki itsemurhan. Olithan sin hnen
lheinen ystvns. Tai sir Henry Ashton, jonka tytyi lhte pois
Englannista, saatettuaan nimens hpen. Tehn olitte aivan
eroamattomia. Ent Adrian Singleton, joka sai niin julman lopun? Tai
lordi Kentin ainoa poika, jonka tulevaisuus meni aivan hukkaan? Min
tapasin hnen isns eilen St. James Streetill. Hn nytti murtuneen
surusta ja hpest. Ja nuori Perthin herttua? Millaista elm hn nyt
viett? Kukapa hnen seurassaan tahtoisi olla?"

"Ole vaiti, Basil. Sin puhut asioista, joita et tunne lainkaan", sanoi
Dorian Gray purren huultaan ja puhuen halveksivalla nensvyll. "Sin
kysyt miksi Berwick poistuu huoneesta, kun min astun sisn. Hn tekee
sen siksi ett min tunnen hnen elmns, eik sen vuoksi, ett hn
tuntisi minun. Mitenk hnen elmntarinansa voisi olla puhdas,
sellaista verta kuin hnen suonissaan virtaa? Sin tiedustelet minulta
Henry Ashtonin ja nuoren Perthin kohtaloja. Olenko min opettanut heille
paheita ja hurjistelua? Jos Kentin tyhm poika naipi vaimon kadulta,
niin mit se minuun kuuluu? Ja jos Adrian Singleton kirjoittaa ystvns
nimen poikinpin vekseliin, niin olenko min hnen holhoojansa? Min
tiedn kyll kuinka Englannissa juoruillaan. Keskiluokan ihmiset
tuuloittavat moraalisia ennakkoluulojaan kehnoilla pivllisilln ja
kuiskaten kertovat parempien ihmisten epsiveellisyydest, niinkuin he
sit nimittvt, luuloitellakseen toisilleen ett he itse liikkuvat
parhaissa seurapiireiss ja ovat lheisi tuttavia niille, joita he
panettelevat. Tss maassa ei tarvita muuta kuin arvostelukyky ja
ymmrryst, jotta saa kaikki pahat kielet kimppuunsa. Ja millaista
elm viettvt itse nuo ihmiset, jotka ovat olevinansa siveellisi?
Rakas ystv, sin unohdat, ett me elmme teeskentelyn isnmaassa."

"Dorian", huudahti Hallward, "siit ei ole nyt kysymys. Englanti on
kylliksi kurja, sen tiedn, ja englantilainen seuraelm on lvitsens
huonoa. Juuri sen vuoksi tahtoisin ett sin olisit hyv. Sin et ole
ollut hyv. Ihmisell on oikeus arvostella toista sen mukaan, mit hn
on ystviins vaikuttanut. Sinun ystvsi nyttvt kadottavan kaiken
kunniantunnon, hyvyyden ja puhtauden. Sin olet herttnyt heiss hurjan
nautinnonhalun. He ovat vajonneet syvlle. Se on sinun tytsi. Niin,
sin olet heit viekoitellut, ja kuitenkin sin voit nauraa, niinkuin
nyt naurat. Ja siin piilee vielkin pahempaa. Min tiedn ett sin ja
Harry olette eroamattomia. Jo senkin vuoksi, jollei minkn muun syyn
thden, teidn ei olisi pitnyt saattaa hnen sisarensa nime joka
miehen suuhun."

"Punnitse sanojasi, Basil. Sin menet liian pitklle."

"Minun tytyy saada puhua, ja sinun pit kuunnella. Sinun on pakko
kuunnella. Kun sin tutustuit lady Gwendoleen, niin ei kuulunut viel
pienintkn panettelua hnest. Onko nyt Lontoossa ainoatakaan
kunniallista naista, joka hnen kanssaan tahtoisi ajaa Hyde Parkissa?
Eivthn hnen lapsensakaan saa el hnen kanssansa. Sitten on
liikkunut toisiakin juttuja -- miten sinut on nhty aamunsarastuksessa
hiipivn ulos huonomaineisista taloista ja valepuvussa istuvan Lontoon
kurjimmissa kapakoissa. Ovatko nuo jutut tosia? Voivatko ne olla tosia?
Ensin kun kuulin niit, niin nauroin. Nyt nuo kertomukset saattavat
minut vrisemn. Ja mit kerrotaan sinun maatilastasi ja siit
elmst, jota siell vietetn? Dorian, sin et tied, mit sinusta
sanotaan. Min en sinulle sano, etten aio pit sinulle saarnoja.
Muistan Harryn sanoneen kerran, ett jokainen, joka yritt ruveta
sielunparantajaksi, aloittaa tuon toimen vakuuttamalla sit, mutta ensi
tykseen sykin sanansa. Min tahdon todellakin saarnata sinulle. Min
tahdon ett viett sellaista elm, jolla voitat ihmisten kunnioitusta.
Min tahdon ett sinun nimesi on puhdas ja maineesi tahraton. Min
tahdon ett eroat niiden kunniattomien parista, joiden kanssa olet
seurustellut. l kohauta tuolla tavalla olkapitsi. l ole niin
vlinpitmtn. Sinussa on ihmeellinen voima. Kyt sit hyvn, lk
pahaan. Sanotaan ett sin turmelet jokaisen, joka liittyy sinuun, ja
ettei tarvita muuta kuin ett sin olet vieraana talossa, jotta siell
tapahtuisi jotakin hpellist. Min en tied onko se totta vai ei.
Mist min tietisin. Mutta niin sinusta sanotaan. Minulle on kerrottu
asioita, joita on aivan mahdoton uskoa. Lordi Gloucester oli minun
parhaita ystvini Oxfordissa. Hn nytti minulle kirjeen, jonka hnen
vaimonsa oli kirjoittanut hnelle vh ennen kuolemaansa huvilastaan
Mentonesta. Sinun nimesi oli sekoitettu kaikkein julmimpaan
tunnustukseen mit ikn olen lukenut. Min sanoin hnelle ett se oli
mahdotonta -- ett tunsin sinut niin hyvin, ja ettet sin voinut tehd
itsesi syypksi mihinkn sellaiseen. Tunnenko sinua? Tokko min
sittenkn tunnen sinua? Ennenkuin voin vastata siihen, tytyisi minun
saada nhd sinun sielusi."

"Nhd minun sieluni!" mutisi Dorian Gray hyphten yls sohvalta, ja
katsoen hneen kalpeana kauhusta.

"Niin", sanoi Hallward vakavasti, ness syv, surullinen svy --
"nhd sinun sielusi. Mutta sit voi vain Jumala tehd."

Katkera pilkannauru kajahti nuoremman miehen huulilta. "Sin voit saada
sen nhd viel tn iltana!" huudahti hn ottaen kteens lampun
pydlt. "Tule, se on sinun omaa tytsi. Miksi et voisi katsella sit?
Voit kertoa siit maailmallekin perstpin, jos haluat. Ei kukaan sinua
uskoisi. Jos he uskoisivat sinua, niin he pitisivt minusta vain viel
enemmn. Min tunnen maailmaa paremmin kuin sin, vaikka sin puhut
siit niin pitklt. Kuulehan, sin olet puhunut nyt kylliksi paheesta.
Nyt saat silmt sit kasvoista kasvoihin."

Ylpeyden hulluutta oli joka ainoassa sanassa, jonka hn lausui. Hn
polki jalkaansa poikamaisella krsimttmyydell. Hn tunsi hurjaa iloa
ajatellessaan ett joku muukin psisi hnen salaisuutensa perille ja
ett se mies, joka oli maalannut tuon kuvan, josta hnen hpens oli
saanut alkunsa, saisi koko loppuikns kantaa taakkanaan oman tyns
julmaa muistoa.

"Niin", hn jatkoi astuen lhemmksi ja katsoen suoraan toista silmiin,
"min nytn sinulle minun sieluni. Sin saat nhd sen, mink luulit
Jumalan yksin voivan nhd."

Hallward spshti. "Sin pilkkaat, Dorian!" hn huudahti. "Sinun ei pid
puhua tuollaisia asioita. Se on hirve puhetta, eik se tarkoita
mitn."

"Luuletko niin?" Hn nauroi jlleen.

"Min tiedn sen. Sen mink tn iltana sanoin sinulle, tein parhaassa
tarkoituksessa. Tiedthn ett aina olen ollut sinulle uskollinen
ystv."

"l koske minuun. Puhu loppuun."

Maalarin kasvoille kohosi tuskallinen ilme. Hn vaikeni hetkeksi, ja
kiihke slin tunne sai vallan hness. Mutta mik oikeus hnell oli
tunkeutua Dorian Grayn elmn? Jos hn oli tehnyt vain kymmenennenkin
osan siit mit huhu kertoi, niin kuinka hirvesti hn oli saanut
krsi! Sitten Basil oikaisi itsen, astui uunin luo ja ji siihen
seisomaan katsellen palavia halkoja, niiden hrmntapaista tuhkaa ja
lekottavia liekkej.

"Min odotan, Basil", sanoi nuori mies kovalla, selvll nell.

Basil kntyi ympri. "Min tahdon vain sanoa sinulle", huudahti hn,
"ett haluan saada vastauksen niihin hirmuisiin syytksiin, joita sinua
vastaan on tehty. Jos sanot minulle ett ne ovat valheellisia alusta
loppuun asti, niin uskon sinua. Kiell ne, Dorian, kiell! Etk ne
kuinka min krsin? Hyv Jumala! l sano, ett olet huono, kurja ja
hpellinen."

Dorian Gray hymyili. Hnen huulensa kaareutuivat pilkallisesti. "Tule
yls, Basil", hn sanoi, levollisesti. "Min pidn pivkirjaa
elmstni joka piv, eik se koskaan poistu siit huoneesta, jossa
sit kirjoitetaan. Min nytn sen sinulle, jos tulet minun mukanani."

"Min tulen, Dorian, jos sin haluat. Huomaan ett myhstyisin
kuitenkin junasta. Se ei tee mitn. Voin lhte huomenna. Mutta l
pyyd minua lukemaan mitn tn iltana. Min en halua muuta kuin suoran
vastauksen kysymykseeni."

"Sen sin saat ylhll. Tll en voi vastata. Ei sinun tarvitse
pitklt lukea."




LUKU XIII.


Dorian astui ulos huoneesta ja alkoi nousta portaita yls Basil
Hallwardin seuratessa hnt. He kulkivat neti, niinkuin ihmiset
vaistomaisesti yll kulkevat. Lamppu heitti eriskummallisia varjoja
seinlle ja portaille. Tuulenpuuska kilisti ikkunaruutuja.

Kun he psivt portaiden ylphn, niin Dorian laski lampun lattialle
ja ottaen avaimen esille hn vnsi lukkoa. "Sin siis haluat sit
tiet, Basil?" hn kysyi hiljaisella nell.

"Kyll."

"Sep hyv", hn vastasi hymyillen. Sitten hn lissi kovalla nell:
"Sin olet ainoa ihminen, jolla on oikeutta tiet minusta kaikki. Sin
olet vaikuttanut minun elmni enemmn kuin aavistatkaan", ja ottaen
lampun maasta hn avasi oven ja astui sisn. Kylm viima puhalsi heit
vastaan ja lampusta kohosi kki synkk oransinkeltainen liekki. Hnt
vrisytti. "Sulje ovi", kuiskasi hn asettaen lampun pydlle.

Hallward katseli ymprilleen hmmstyneen. Tuntui silt kuin huonetta
ei olisi kytetty vuosikausiin. Vaalennut flandrilainen gobeliini,
peitetty taulu, vanha italialainen arkku, ja melkein tyhj kirjahylly --
siin kaikki mit huoneessa nytti olevan, paitsi yht tuolia ja pyt.
Kun Dorian Gray sytytti puoleksi palaneen kynttiln uuninreunalla, niin
Basil huomasi ett koko huone oli tynn tomua ja ett matto oli
repaleinen. Hiiri rapisteli laudoituksen takana. Ilma oli kostea ja
ummehtunut.

"Vai luuletko sin, ettei kukaan muu paitsi Jumala voisi nhd ihmisen
sielua, Basil? Ved tuo verho syrjn, niin saat nhd minun sieluni."

ni oli kova ja julma.

"Sin olet hullu, Dorian, tai sitten sin teeskentelet", mutisi Hallward
rypisten kulmakarvojaan.

"Etk tahdo? Sitten minun tytyy tehd se itse", sanoi nuori mies, ja
hn veti verhon syrjn ja heitti sen lattialle.

Kauhun huuto psi maalarin huulilta kun hn nki nuo hirvet kasvot,
jotka himmess valossa irvistivt hnelle. Niiden ilmeess oli jotakin,
joka hertti hness inhoa ja kauhua. Hyv Jumala, Dorian Grayn omat
kasvothan tuossa katselivat hnt! Tuo salaperinen voima, mik se
sitten lienee ollutkin, ei ollut viel kokonaan hvittnyt niiden
ihmeellist kauneutta. Viel oli kullan kiiltoa harvenneissa hiuksissa
ja hiukan punaa aistillisissa huulissa. Vhn sinist suloutta oli
silynyt mys turvonneihin silmiin, eik hienosti meislattujen sieramien
eik kaunismuotoisen kaulan jalot piirteet olleet viel kokonaan
kadonneet. Niin, se oli Dorian itse. Mutta kuka oli sen maalannut? Hn
oli tuntevinaan siin oman pensselins jlki ja keht olivat hnen
piirtmns. Mutta olihan se aivan mahdotonta. Hn tarttui tuskallisesti
kynttiln ja valaisi sill kuvaa. Vasempaan kulmaan oli hnen oma
nimens piirretty korkeilla punaisilla kirjaimilla.

Se oli inhottava parodia, halpamainen karrikatyyri. Tt hn ei ollut
koskaan maalannut. Ja sittenkin se oli hnen tytn. Hn tiesi sen, ja
hnest tuntui, ett hnen kuuma verens kki jhmettyi jksi. Hnenk
tyns? Mit se merkitsi? Miksi se oli muuttunut? Hn kntyi taakseen
ja katsoi Dorian Grayhin murtunein silmin. Hnen suunsa vrhteli ja
hnen kielens oli niin kuiva, ettei hn saanut sanaakaan sanotuksi. Hn
siveli kdell otsaansa. Se oli tahmeana hiest.

Nuori mies nojasi uunin reunaa vasten ja tarkasteli Basilia tuolla
omituisella katseella, joka kohoaa katselijoiden kasvoihin, jotka
haltioituneina seuraavat jonkun suuren taiteilijan nyttelemist. Se ei
ilmaissut todellista surua, mutta ei myskn todellista iloa. Siin
nkyi vain katselijan kiihkoa, ja ehk mys voitonriemun vlkett
silmiss. Hn oli irroittanut kukan napinlvestn ja haisteli sit, tai
oli ainakin haistelevinaan.

"Mit tm merkitsee?" huudahti Hallward vihdoin. Hnen nens kajahti
tervlt ja vieraalta hnen omissa korvissaan.

"Vuosia sitten, kun olin viel hyvin nuori", sanoi Dorian Gray rutistaen
kukkaa kdessn, "sin tapasit minut, imartelit minua ja opetit minulle
turhamaisuutta. Ern pivn sin esitit minulle ern ystvsi, joka
selitti minulle nuoruuden ihmeit, ja sin valmistit minun muotokuvani,
joka opetti minua ymmrtmn kauneuden ihmeit. Hulluna hetken, en
tied vielkn, kadunko sit vai en, min lausuin ilmi toivomuksen,
sin sanoisit sit ehk rukoukseksi..."

"Muistan sen hyvin! Oi, miten hyvin sen muistankaan! Ei! Se on
mahdotonta. Huone on kostea. Kuva on homehtunut. Ehkp vriss on ollut
jotain myrkky. Min sanon sinulle, ett se on mahdotonta."

"Ah, mik on mahdotonta?" mutisi nuori mies astuen ikkunan luo ja
nojaten otsansa kylmn, sumusta kostuneesen ruutuun.

"Sin sanoit hvittneesi kuvan."

"Min olin vrss. Se on hvittnyt minut."

"Min en usko, ett se on minun maalaamani."

"Etk ne siin ihannettasi?" sanoi Dorian katkerasti.

"Minun ihanteeni, niinkuin sin sit nimitt..."

"Niinkuin sin sit nimitit."

"Siin ei ollut mitn pahaa, eik hpellist. Sin olit minulle
sellainen ihanne, jota en koskaan en ole tavannut. Nuo ovat satyyrin
kasvot."

"Ne ovat minun sieluni kasvot!"

"Hyv Jumala, millaista olentoa min olen jumaloinut! Sill on perkeleen
silmt."

"Jokaisen ihmisen sielussa on taivas ja helvetti, Basil", huudahti
Dorian tehden eptoivoisen liikkeen.

Hallward kntyi taas kuvaa kohti ja katseli sit. "Hyv Jumala, jos se
on totta", hn huudahti, "ja jos tuolla tavalla olet turmellut elmsi,
niin olet paljoa pahempikin kuin miksi panettelijat sinua luulevat!" Hn
valaisi kynttilll jlleen kuvaa ja tarkasteli sit. Pinta nytti
olevan aivan turmeltumaton, aivan sellainen kuin hn sen oli kdestn
jttnyt. Varmaan tuo hvitys oli tullut sisltpin. Jonkun sisllisen
prosessin voimasta synnin spitalitauti syvytti kuvaa. Ruumiin
mtneminen kosteassa haudassa ei ollut yht kauheaa.

Hnen ktens vapisi, kynttil putosi jalasta lattialle ja sihisi. Hn
polki jalallaan sen plle ja sammutti sen. Sitten hn heittytyi
horjuvalle tuolille pydn reen ja peitti kasvonsa ksiins.

"Hyv Jumala, Dorian, mik lksytys! Mik hirve lksytys!" Vastausta ei
kuulunut, mutta hn eroitti nuoren miehen nyyhkytyksen ikkunan luota.
"Rukoile, Dorian, rukoile", hn mutisi! "Mitenk meit opetettiinkaan
sanomaan lapsuudessamme? 'l johdata meit kiusaukseen. Anna meille
meidn syntimme anteeksi. Pst meit pahasta'. Rukoillaan yhdess.
Sinun ylpeytesi rukous on tyttynyt. Sinun katumuksesi rukous menee mys
tytntn. Min jumaloin sinua liiaksi. Nyt olen saanut rangaistukseni.
Sin jumaloit itsesi liiaksi! Me olemme molemmat tulleet rangaistuksi."

Dorian Gray kntyi hitaasti taakseen ja katseli hnt kyyneltynein
silmin. "Se on liian myhist, Basil", hn nkytti.

"Ei koskaan ole liian myhist, Dorian. Polvistukaamme yhdess ja
koettakaamme, emmek muistaisi viel rukousta. Eik ole jotain
tmntapaista lausetta: 'Jos teidn syntinne veriruskiat olisivat, niin
heidn pit lumivalkeaksi tuleman'?"

"Nuo sanat eivt merkitse minulle en mitn".

"l sano sit. Olet tehnyt kylliksi pahaa elmsssi. Hyv Jumala! Etk
ne miten tuo kirottu kuva vilkuu meihin?"

Dorian Gray vilkaisi kuvaan, ja kki selittmtn vihan tunne Basil
Hallwardia kohtaan valtasi hnet, iknkuin kuva olisi sen hness
herttnyt ja kuiskannut sen hnen korvaansa inhottavilla huulillaan.
Takaa-ajetun elimen hurja kiihko villitsi hnet, ja hn tunsi inhoa
tuota miest kohtaan, joka istui pydn ress, inhosi hnt enemmn
kuin ketn muuta koko elmssn. Hn silmsi hurjana ymprilleen.
Jotain kirkasta loisti maalatun arkun kannella aivan hnen edessn.
Hnen silmns osui siihen. Hn tiesi mik se oli. Hn oli tuonut tuon
veitsen mukanaan pari piv sitten katkoaksensa nuoran ptkn, ja
unohtanut sen tnne. Hitaasti hn liikkui sit kohti, astuen Hallwardin
ohi. Heti kun hn psi hnen taaksensa, hn tarttui veitseen ja
knnhti ympri. Hallward liikahti tuolissaan, iknkuin hn olisi
aikonut nousta yls. Dorian hykksi hnt kohti ja tynsi veitsen
suureen valtimoon korvan taakse, painaen miehen pn pyt vasten ja
iskien hnt veitsell yh uudestaan ja uudestaan.

Kuului tukahdettua hkymist ja sellaista kauheaa korisemista rinnassa,
kun veri on tukahduttaa ihmisen. Kolme kertaa ojossa-olevat kdet
kohosivat suonenvedontapaisesti ja tavoittelivat jykin sormin ilmaa.
Dorian iski hnt viel kahdesti, mutta mies ei liikkunut. Hn odotti
viel hetkisen, painaen pt yh vasten pyt. Sitten hn heitti
veitsen pydlle ja ji kuuntelemaan.

Hn ei voinut kuulla muuta kuin hiljaista tippumista kuluneelle matolle.
Hn avasi oven ja astui ulos portaille. Talo oli aivan neti. Ei kukaan
liikkunut. Hetken aikaa hn seisoi nojautuneena ksinojaan ja thysteli
mustaan, hiljaiseen pimeyteen. Sitten hn otti avaimen lukosta ja palasi
takaisin huoneesen, sulkien oven jljissn.

Kuollut istui yh tuolilla, nojautuneena pydn yli, selk kumarassa,
ksivarret riipuksissa. Jollei niskassa olisi ollut ammoittavaa haavaa
ja tahmeaa, mustaa ltkk lattialla, joka yh laajenemistaan laajeni,
niin olisi voinut luulla miehen nukkuvan.

Kuinka nopeasti tuo kaikki oli tapahtunut! Hn oli niin ihmeellisen
tyyni, ja astuen ikkunan luo hn avasi sen ja meni balkongille. Tuuli
oli hajoittanut sumun, ja taivas loisti kuin rettmn riikinkukon
pyrst, tynn tuhansia kimaltelevia silmi. Hn katsoi alas kadulle ja
nki poliisin kiertvn hiljaisten talojen ympri ja valaisevan
lyhdylln niiden portteja. Kadunkulmasta sukelsi nkyviin rmisevn
ajurin punainen tuli ja katosi jlleen. Nainen, huivi hartioillaan,
hiipi hitaasti ja horjuen sein pitkin. Vh-vli hn pyshtyi ja
vilkaisi taakseen. Sitten hn alkoi laulaa raa'alla nell. Poliisi
astui hnt kohti ja sanoi hnelle jotakin. Hn hoiperteli pois nauraen.
Kylm tuuli puhalsi yli torin. Kaasulyhdyt lekottelivat ja lehdettmt
puut ravistivat mustia, routaisia oksiaan edes ja takaisin. Dorian
vrisi ja palasi takaisin huoneesen, sulkien ikkunan.

Tultuaan ovelle hn knsi avainta ja avasi oven. Hn ei edes vilkaissut
kuolleesen. Hnen mielestn oli parasta, ett tapaus pysyi niin
hmrn kuin suinkin. Ystv, joka oli maalannut tuon onnettoman, vain
turmiota tuottaneen kuvan, oli kadonnut hnen elmstn. Siin kyllin.

Sitten hn muisti lampun. Se oli harvinaista, maurilaista tekoa
himmest hopeasta, jossa oli oxiderattuja terskoristeita ja suuria
turkoseja. Ehk palvelija kaipaisi sit ja kysyisi minne se oli
joutunut. Hn epri hetken aikaa, sitten hn kntyi takaisin ja otti
sen pydlt. Hn ei voinut vltt nkemst kuollutta. Kuinka hiljaa
hn oli! Miten kauhean pitklt hnen valkoiset ktens nyttivt! Aivan
kuin jokin hirve vahakuva.

Lukittuaan oven jlkeens hn hiipi hiljaa portaita alas. Portaat
rasahtelivat, iknkuin ne olisivat tuskasta nnelleet. Hn pyshtyi
usean kerran ja kuunteli. Ei, kaikki oli hiljaa. Hnen omat askeleensa
vain olivat kajahtaneet.

Kun hn saapui kirjastoon, niin hn nki laukun ja pllystakin
nurkassa. Ne olivat jonnekin piiloitettavat. Hn avasi laudoituksessa
olevan salaisen seinkaapin, jossa hn silytti omat kummalliset
valepukunsa, ja pani ne sinne. Helposti hn polttaisi ne jljestpin.
Sitten hn katsoi kelloaan. Se oli kahtakymment yli yhden.

Hn istahti ja alkoi mietti. Joka vuosi -- melkeinp joka kuukausi
ihmisi hirtettiin Englannissa samasta rikoksesta, jonka hn nyt oli
tehnyt. Ilmassa oli ollut mieletnt murhankiihkoa. Jokin punainen thti
oli tullut liian lhelle maata... Ja sittenkin, mit todisteita oli
hnt vastaan? Basil Hallward oli lhtenyt talosta puoli yhdelttoista.
Ei kukaan ollut nhnyt hnen palaavan. Useimmat palvelijoista olivat
Selby Royalissa. Hnen kamaripalvelijansa nukkui... Parisiin! Niin.
Parisiin Basil oli lhtenyt yjunalla, niinkuin hn oli aikonutkin. Hn
vietti niin omituista erakkoelm, ett kuukausia saattoi kulua,
ennenkuin mitn epilyksi herisi. Kuukausia! Kaikki jljet saattoivat
sit ennen kadota.

killinen ajatus juolahti hnen mieleens. Hn otti turkkinsa ja
takkinsa ja meni ulos eteiseen. Siin hn pyshtyi kuullessaan poliisin
hitaat ja raskaat askeleet katukytvlt ja nhdessn lyhdyn valon
kuvastuvan ikkunaan. Hn odotti henken pidtellen.

Hetken kuluttua hn avasi oven, puikahti ulos ja sulki sen varovasti
jlkeens. Sitten hn alkoi soittaa kelloa. Viiden minuutin kuluttua
kamaripalvelija tuli puolipukimissaan ja unisena eteiseen.

"Olen pahoillani, ett minun oli pakko hertt teidt, Francis", hn
sanoi astuessaan sisn; "mutta avain oli minulta unohtunut. Mit kello
on?"

"Kymmenen minuuttia yli kahden, herra", vastasi mies katsoen kelloaan.

"Kymmenen minuuttia yli kahden? Kuinka myhist. Herttk minut
huomenna yhdekslt. Minulla on hiukan tyt."

"Hyv, herra."

"Onko kukaan kynyt tll tn iltana?"

"Mr. Hallward, herra. Hn odotti tll kello yhteentoista asti, ja
sitten hn meni asemalle."

"Oi, sep ikv etten tavannut hnt. Jttik hn mitn sanaa?"

"Ei, herra. Hn sanoi vain kirjoittavansa teille Parisista, jollei hn
tapaisi teit klubissa."

"Se on hyv, Francis. lk unohtako hertt minua kello yhdekslt."

"En, herra."

Mies hiipi pois tohveleissaan kytvt pitkin.

Dorian Gray heitti pllystakkinsa ja hattunsa pydlle ja meni
kirjastoon. Neljnnestunnin hn astui edes-takaisin huoneessa purren
huultaan ja miettien. Sitten hn otti hyllylt aateliskalenterin ja
selaili lehti. "Alan Campbell, 152, Hertford street, Mayfair." Aivan
oikein. Sit miest hn juuri tarvitsi.




LUKU XIV.


Seuraavana aamuna kello yhdeksn palvelija toi sisn shokolaadia
tarjottimella ja avasi ikkunaluukut. Dorian nukkui aivan rauhallisesti
oikealla kyljelln, ksi posken alla. Hn nytti nuorelta pojalta, joka
oli vsynyt leikin tai lukujen jlkeen.

Palvelija kosketti hnt kahdesti olkaphn ennenkuin hn hersi, ja
kun hn avasi silmns, niin hieno hymy karehti hnen huulillaan,
iknkuin hn olisi nhnyt jotain suloista unta. Mutta hn ei ollut
uneksinut yhtn. Y oli kulunut rauhallisesti, ilman iloisten tai
tuskallisten kuvien hirit. Mutta nuoret hymyilevt ilman
minknlaista syyt. Siin onkin heidn suurin suloutensa.

Hn kntyi toiselle puolelle ja nojaten kyynrphns alkoi maistella
shokolaadia. Lempe marraskuun aurinko paistoi sisn huoneesen. Taivas
oli pilvetn, ja ilma lmmin. Tuntuipa melkein kuin olisi ollut
kevtaamu.

Vhitellen kuluneen yn tapahtumat palasivat nettmin, verentahraamin
askelin hnen aivoihinsa ja muuttuivat peloittavan selviksi. Hnt
vrisytti muistellessaan mit kaikkea hn oli saanut krsi, ja hetkeksi
hnet valtasi sama kummallinen inhon tunne Basil Hallwardia kohtaan,
joka oli pakoittanut hnt murhaamaan hnet, ja hn tuli aivan
jkylmksi vihasta. Kuollut istui yh tuolla ylhll tydess
auringonvalossa. Miten hirve se oli! Tuollaiset julmat asiat kuuluivat
pimeyteen, eik pivnvaloon.

Hn tunsi tulevansa sairaaksi tai hulluksi, jos hn alkaisi hautoa
kaikkia kokemuksiaan. On syntej, joita muistellessa tuntee suurempaa
nautintoa, kuin itse teossa ollessa, omituisia voittoja, jotka
tyydyttvt enemmn ylpeytt kuin intohimoa, ja jotka vaikuttavat
voimakkaammin ja virkistvmmin jrkeen kuin aisteihin. Mutta tm oli
jotakin aivan toista. Se oli karkoitettava mielest, huumattava
unikoilla ja kuristettava, jotta ei itse tulisi kuristetuksi.

Kun kello li puoli kymmenen, niin hn siveli kdell otsaansa ja nousi
kisti yls, pukeutui vielkin suuremmalla tarkkuudella kuin
tavallisesti, valitsi erityisell huolella kaulahuivinsa ja
kravattineulansa ja vaihtoi useita kertoja sormuksiaan. Hn istui mys
kauan aikaa aamullispydn ress, maistellen erilaisia ruokalajeja ja
jutellen kamaripalvelijansa kanssa uusista livreoista, joita hn aikoi
teett palvelijoilleen Selbyss, ja tarkastaessaan kirjeitn.
Muutamille kirjeilleen hn nauroi. Kolme niist suututti hnt. Yht hn
luki useampaan kertaan ja repi sen sitten rikki krsimttmsti.
"Naisten muisti on hirvittv!" -- niin oli lordi Henry kerran sanonut.

Juotuaan kupin mustaa kahvia, hn pyyhki hitaasti suutaan
lautasliinalla, antoi palvelijalle merkin ja kirjoitti hnen
odottaessaan kaksi kirjett. Toisen hn pisti taskuunsa, toisen hn
ojensi palvelijalle.

"Viek tm mr. Campbellille Hertford Streetin varrelle taloon n:o 152,
Francis, ja jos hn ei ole kaupungissa, niin tiedustelkaa hnen
osoitettaan."

Kun hn ji yksin, niin hn sytytti paperossin ja alkoi piirustaa
paperipalaselle, ensin kukkia ja taloja, sitten kasvoja. kki hn
huomasi, ett kaikissa kasvoissa oli jotakin eriskummallista, joka
muistutti Basil Hallwardia. Hn rypisti otsaansa ja nousten yls hn
meni kirjahyllyns luo ja otti kirjan umpimhkn. Hn ptti olla
ajattelematta yllist tapahtumaa ennenkuin se oli aivan vlttmtnt.

Hn oikaisi itsens sohvalle, ja katseli kirjan nimilehte. Se oli
Gautierin teos "Emaux et Cames", Charpentierin julkaisema painos
japanilaisella paperilla, Jacquemartin etsauksilla. Kannet olivat
sitronanvihre nahkaa, jota koristi granaattiomenia kullatun ristikon
keskell. Adrian Singleton oli lahjoittanut sen hnelle. Selaillessaan
lehti hnen silmns osuivat runoon, joka kuvasi Lacenairen ktt --
tuota kylm, keltaista ktt, joka kidutuksen jlkeen oli viel
pesemtn ja jossa oli untuvamaiset punaiset karvat ja faunin sormet.
Hn katseli omia, kapeita sormiansa vristen vaistomaisesti ja selaili
edelleen, kunnes hn tuli nihin ihaniin Venetsiaa kuvaaviin skeihin:

    "Sur une gamme chromatique,
      le sein de perles ruisselant,
    la Venus de l'Adriatique
      sort de l'eau son corps rose et blanc.

    Les dmes, sur l'azur des ondes
      suivant la phrase au pur contour,
    s'enflent comme des gorges rondes
      que soulve un soupir d'amour.

    L'esquif aborde et me depose,
      jetant son amarre au pilier,
    devant une faade rose,
      sur le marbre d'un escalier."

    Kuin kromaatiselta svelasteikolta, helma helmi herahdellen, Adrian
    Venus nousee vedest, ruumis ruusunpunaisena ja valkeana.

    Kirkot puhtaine riviivoineen, aaltojen asuurisiness uiden,
    seuraavat svelasteikkoa nekin, paisuvina kuin pyret kaulat,
    joista rakkauden huokaus kohoaa.

    Pursi lhenee ja laskee minut maihin, heitten ankkuritouvinsa
    pylvsen, ruusunpunaisen fasadin, marmoriportaiden edustalle.

Kuinka ihanat nuo skeet! Kun luki niit, niin tuntui silt kuin olisi
soljunut pitkin vihertvi vesiteit helmien ja neilikkojen kaupungissa,
ja mukavasti loikonut mustassa gondolissa, jonka keulavannas olisi
hopeaa ja verhot hulmuaisivat tuulenhengess. Nuo yksinkertaiset rivit
olivat hnest kuin suoria, turkosisinisi juovia, jotka seuraavat
mukana kulkiessa Lidoa kohti. killiset vrinkimallukset muistuttivat
hnen mieleens opaali- ja iriskaulaisten lintujen vlkett niiden
parveillessa solakan campanilen ymprill, jonka kyljiss on
lukemattomia uurteita, tai niiden kopeansulavasti keikistelless
hmriss, tomuisissa pylvskytviss. Nojautuen taakse ja sulkien
silmns hn toisti kerta toisensa jlkeen:

    "Devant une faade rose,
      sur le marbre d'un escalier."

Nuo kaksi sett kuvastivat koko Venetsiaa. Hn muisti syksy, jonka hn
siell oli viettnyt ja sit ihmeellist rakkautta, joka oli
kiihoittanut hnet mielettmiin, suloisiin hullutuksiin. Joka ainoalla
paikalla on oma romantisuutensa. Mutta Venetsia, samoinkuin Oxfordkin,
oli silyttnyt taustan romantisuudelleen, ja aito-romantisuudelle on
tausta kaikkein trkeint. Basil oli ollut jonkun aikaa hnen mukanansa,
ja tm oli ollut aivan hullaantuneena Tintorettoon. Basil parka! Kuinka
hirve tuollainen loppu oli ihmiselle!

Hn huokasi ja otti kirjan jlleen kteens ja koetti unohtaa. Hn luki
pskysist, jotka lentelevt edes-takaisin pienen smyrnalaisen kahvilan
ovesta, jossa pyhiinvaeltajat istuvat lukien merikivihelmin ja
turbaanipiset kauppiaat polttavat pitki tupsupisi piippujaan
vakavasti keskustellen toistensa kanssa; hn luki Place de la Concorden
obeliskista, joka vuodattaa graniittikyyneli kaukaisessa,
auringottomassa maanpaossaan ja ikvitsee takaisin lmpimn,
lotuskukkaisen Niilin rannalle, jossa on sfinksej, ruusunpunaisia
ibislintuja, valkoisia, kultakyntisi kotkia ja vihresilmisi, pieni,
vihress hyryvss mudassa matelevia krokodiilej. Hn alkoi
mielessn hautoa noita skeit, joiden sointu on lhtisin suudelmien
hivuttamasta marmorista, ja joissa kuvautuu se ihmeellinen patsas, mit
Gautier vertaa kontra-alttoneen, tuo "_monstre charmant_", joka uinuu
Louvren porfyrisalissa. Mutta hetken kuluttua kirja putosi hnen
kdestns. Hn hermostui ja hirve tuskantristys tuli hnen ylitsens.
Mitp jos Alan Campbell ei olisikaan Englannissa? Pivi kuluisi
ennenkuin hn palaisi takaisin. Ehk hn ei suostuisi tulemaankaan.
Mitp hn sitten tekisi? Joka ainoa hetki oli hnelle kallis.

He olivat ennen olleet hyvt ystvt, noin viisi vuotta sitten -- aivan
eroamattomat ystvt. Sitten ystvyys oli kki loppunut. Kun he nyt
tapasivat toisensa seuroissa, niin Dorian Gray vain hymyili; Alan
Campbell ei hymyillyt koskaan.

Hn oli hyvin etev nuori mies, vaikka hn ei ymmrtnytkn
kuvaamataiteita, ja ksityksens runoudesta hn oli kokonaan saanut
Dorianilta. Tiede oli hnen pharrastuksensa. Cambridgess hn oli
viettnyt enimmn aikansa laboratorityss ja oli suorittanut hyvn
tutkinnon luonnontieteiss. Yh vielkin hn tutki suurella innolla
kemiaa, ja hnell oli oma laboratorinsa, jonne hn sulkeutui pivt
pitkin itins suureksi suruksi, joka olisi toivonut hnest parlamentin
jsent, sill kemisti, hnen mielestn, oli vain reseptien laatija.
Hn oli hyvin soitannollinen, ja soitti sek viulua ett pianoa paremmin
kuin useimmat taiteenharrastajat. Soitto se olikin kaikkein ensiksi
vienyt hnet ja Dorian Grayn yhteen -- soitto ja tuo selittmtn voima,
jolla Dorian nytti mielens mukaan voivan vaikuttaa muihin ihmisiin, ja
jota hn usein tietmttnkin kytti. He olivat tavanneet toisensa lady
Berkshiren luona ern iltana, jolloin Rubinstein oli siell soittanut,
ja sen jlkeen heit nhtiin aina yhdess ooperassa ja joka paikassa,
miss hyv musiikkia oli kuultavana. Kahdeksantoista kuukautta heidn
ystvyyttn kesti. Campbell oli aina joko Selby Royalissa tai Grosvenor
squaren varrella. Hnen, samoinkuin niin monen muunkin mielest, Dorian
Gray edusti kaikkea, mik elmss oli ihmeellist ja viehttv. Ei
kukaan tiennyt oliko heidn vlilleen syntynyt riitaa vai ei. Mutta
ihmiset huomasivat kki, ett he tuskin puhuttelivat toisiaan
tavatessansa ja ett Campbell nytti aina lhtevn varhemmin pois
seurasta, miss Dorian Graykin oli lsn. Hn oli myskin muuttunut --
ajoittain hn oli hyvin alakuloinen, ei nyttnyt sietvn musiikkia,
eik tahtonut koskaan itse soittaa. Kun hnt pyydettiin soittamaan,
niin hn puolustuksekseen sanoi olevansa niin kiinni tieteellisiss
tiss, ettei hnelle jnyt aikaa harjoittamiseen. Ja se olikin totta.
Piv pivlt hnen harrastuksensa biologiaan yh kasvoi, ja hnen
nimens esiintyi kerran tai pari tieteellisiss aikakauskirjoissa
ihmeellisten kokeilujen yhteydess.

Sellainen oli se mies, jota Dorian Gray odotti. Joka hetki hn vilkaisi
kelloonsa. Ja sit myten kuin aika kului hnen kiihkeytens yh kasvoi.
Lopulta hn nousi pystyyn ja alkoi kulkea edes-takaisin huoneessa, aivan
kuin hkkiin telkitty kaunis elin. Hn astui pitkin, hiipivin askelin.
Hnen ktens olivat jkylmt.

Odotus kvi sietmttmksi. Aika tuntui hnest hiipivn
lyijynraskailla askelilla, samalla kuin hn itse myrskytuulessa ajautui
mustan, ammottavan kuilun rosoista reunaa vasten. Hn tiesi mik sielt
hnt vijyi, hn nkikin sen, ja painoi vavisten kosteat sormensa
polttavia silmluomiaan vasten iknkuin hn olisi tahtonut riist
aivoilta niiden nkkyvyn ja pakoittaa silmt takaisin onkaloihinsa. Se
oli turhaa. Aivoilla oli oma ravintonsa, jota se ahmi, ja kauhusta
hurjistunut mielikuvitus vnteli ja kiemurteli kuin elv olento
tuskissansa ja hyppeli pahasti irvistellen kuin kamala marionetti
jalustallaan. kki aika pyshtyi. Niin, tuo sokea, raskaasti huohottava
aika ei liikkunut en; aika oli kuollut, ja hirvet ajatukset, jotka
tunkeutuivat nopeasti esiin, nostattivat julman tulevaisuuden haudastaan
esille ja nyttivt sit Dorianille. Hn tuijotti siihen kauhusta
kivettyneen.

Vihdoin ovi avautui ja palvelija astui sisn. Dorian knsi lasittuneet
silmns hneen.

"Mr. Campbell, herra", sanoi palvelija.

Helpoituksen huokaus psi hnen kuivilta huuliltaan ja puna palasi
hnen poskillensa.

"Pyytk hnt heti astumaan sisn, Francis." Hn tunsi olevansa taas
oma itsens. Heikkouden puuska oli kadonnut.

Mies kumarsi ja poistui. Hetken kuluttua Alan Campbell astui sisn
vakavana ja kalpeana. Hnen kalpeuttaan kohotti hnen pikimusta tukkansa
ja mustat kulmakarvansa.

"Alan, miten ystvllist. Kiitos ett tulit".

"Olin pttnyt etten koskaan en astuisi sinun kynnyksesi yli, Gray.
Mutta sin sanoit ett elm ja kuolema on kysymyksess." Hnen nens
kuulosti kovalta ja kylmlt. Hnen sanansa olivat hitaita ja
punnittuja. Vakava, tutkiva katse, jonka hn kiinnitti Dorianiin,
ilmaisi halveksumista. Hn oli pistnyt ktens astrakanitakkinsa
taskuihin, eik nyttnyt huomanneen sit liikett, jolla Dorian oli
hnt tervehtinyt.

"Niin, elm ja kuolema on kysymyksess, Alan, ja se koskee useampaakin
kuin yht ihmist. Ky istumaan."

Campbell kvi tuolille pydn reen ja Dorian istahti hnt vastapt.
Heidn silmns kohtasivat toisensa. Dorianin katseessa ilmeni syv
sli. Hn tiesi ett se mit hn aikoi tehd, oli hirvittv.

Kiusallisen nettmyyden jlkeen Dorian kumartui eteenpin ja sanoi
hyvin levollisesti, mutta samalla tarkaten mink vaikutuksen hnen
sanansa tekisivt toiseen: "Alan, suljetussa huoneessa ylkerrassa,
huoneessa, jonne ei kelln muulla ole psy paitsi minulla itsellni,
istuu kuollut mies pydn ress. Hn on ollut nyt kymmenen tuntia
kuolleena. l liiku, l tuijota minuun tuolla tavalla. Kuka tuo mies
on, miksi hn kuoli, mill tavalla hn on saanut surmansa, ne ovat
seikkoja, jotka eivt sinua liikuta. Sinulla ei ole muuta tekemist kuin
--"

"Vaikene, Gray. En tahdo tiet sen enemp. Onko sinun puheesi totta
vai ei, on minulle yhdentekev. Min pyydn saada olla erillni sinun
toimistasi. Pid hirvet salaisuutesi ominasi. Ne eivt huvita minua
vhintkn."

"Niiden tytyy huvittaa sinua. Ainakin tmn salaisuuden tytyy. Olen
kovin pahoillani sinun puolestasi, Alan. Mutta min en tule omin voimin
toimeen. Sin yksin voit auttaa minua. Minun tytyy vet sinut thn
juttuun. Minulla ei ole muuta valitsemisen varaa. Alan, sin olet
tiedemies. Sin tunnet kemiaa ja muuta senkaltaista. Sin olet tehnyt
kokeita. Sinun tytyy hvitt se mik tuolla ylkerrassa on -- hvitt
se niin ettei siit j jlkekn. Ei kukaan nhnyt, kun tuo henkil
tuli thn taloon. Tll hetkell luullaan hnen olevan Parisissa. Ei
hnt kuukausiin tulla kaipaamaan. Ja kun hnt kaivataan, niin tll
ei saa lyty jlkekn hnest. Sin, Alan, sinun tytyy muuttaa
hnet, ja kaikki mit hnest on jljell, kouralliseksi tuhkaa, jonka
voin tuuleen sirottaa."

"Sin olet hullu, Dorian."

"Ah! min odotinkin juuri, ett sanoisit minua Dorianiksi."

"Sin olet hullu, sen min sanon sinulle -- hullu, jos luulet ett
kohotan pikkusormeanikaan auttaakseni sinua, hullu, kun teet minulle
tuonlaisen tunnustuksen. Min en tahdo olla minknlaisissa tekemisiss
tuon jutun kanssa. Luuletko sin ett sinun thtesi panisin maineeni
alttiiksi? Mit minua sinun pirulliset toimesi liikuttavat?"

"Se oli itsemurha, Alan".

"Se minua ilahduttaa. Mutta kuka saattoi hnet siihen? Sin,
luullakseni".

"Yh vielk sin kiellt minulta apuasi?"

"Tietysti min kielln. En tahdo olla missn tekemisiss sen kanssa. En
min vlit siit, vaikka jokin hpe sinua kohtaisikin. Sin sen hyvin
ansaitsisit. En surkeilisi, vaikka sinua hvistisiin, vaikkapa aivan
julkisestikin. Kuinka sin voit pyyt juuri minua sekaantumaan thn
inhottavaan juttuun? Luulin sinun paremmin tuntevan ihmisten luonteita.
Ystvsi lordi Henry Wotton ei liene opettanut sinulle paljon
psykologiaa, mit muuta hn lie opettanutkaan. Ei mikn voi pakoittaa
minua auttamaan sinua hituisenkaan vertaa. Olet kntynyt vrn miehen
puoleen. Mene jonkun ystvsi luo. l tule minun luokseni."

"Alan, se oli murha. Min tapoin hnet. Sin et tied, kuinka min olen
saanut krsi hnen kauttansa. Olkoon minun elmni millainen hyvns,
varmaa vain on ett hn on siihen vaikuttanut paljoa enemmn kuin Harry
parka. Se ei ollut hnen tarkoituksensa, mutta tulos oli sittenkin
sama."

"Murha! Hyv Jumala, siihenk sin olet tullut? En min anna sinua ilmi.
Se ei kuulu minulle. Ja joka tapauksessa sin joudut kiinni, vaikka min
en siihen sekaannukkaan. Jokainen, joka tekee rikoksen, tekee mys
jonkun tyhmyyden. Mutta min en tahdo tiet siit mitn."

"Sinun tytyy. Kuules, odotahan hiukan; kuuntele minua. Kuuntele vain
Alan. En min pyyd sinulta muuta kuin ett suorittaisit tieteellisen
kokeen. Sin kyt sairaaloissa ja ruumishuoneissa, ja ne kauheudet,
joita siell teet, eivt hiritse sinun rauhaasi. Jos nkisit tuon
miehen jossakin inhottavassa leikkaussalissa tai haisevassa
laboratorissa lyijypintaisella pydll, johon punaiset viemrit
olisivat uurretut veren juoksua varten, niin sin nkisit hness vain
erinomaisen koe-esineen. Ei hiuskarvakaan kohoaisi psssi. Et tulisi
ajatelleeksikaan ett tekisit jotakin vr. Pinvastoin sin
luultavasti arvelisit tekevsi hyty ihmiskunnalle, kartuttavasi omia
tietojasi, edistvsi tiedett tai muuta sen kaltaista. Sit, mit min
pyydn sinua tekemn, olet tehnyt useasti ennen. Tosiaankin ruumiin
tuhoaminen on varmaan paljoa vhemmn julmaa kuin se ty, jota olet
tottunut tekemn. Ja huomaa, tuo ruumis on ainoana todisteena minua
vastaan. Jos se lydetn, niin olen hukassa; ja se lydetn varmaan,
jollet sin auta minua."

"Minulla ei ole vhintkn halua auttaa sinua. Sen sin unohdat. Koko
juttu ei liikuta minua vhkn. Minulla ei ole sen kanssa mitn
tekemist."

"Alan, min rukoilen sinua. Ajattele miss tilassa min olen. Juuri
ennen sinun tuloasi olin melkein tajuton tuskasta. Ehkp sinkin
jonakuna pivn saat kokea sit tunnetta. Ei! l ajattele sit. Ota
asia vain tieteelliselt kannalta. Sin et kysy, mist ne ruumiit ovat
kotoisin, joilla sin kokeilet. l kysy nytkn. Olen sanonut sinulle
jo liian paljon. Mutta min pyydn sinua sit tekemn. Olimmehan me
kerran ystvi, Alan."

"l puhu niist ajoista, Dorian. Ne ovat kuolleet."

"Joskus on vaikea pst kuolleista erilleen. Mies ylkerrassa ei lhde
pois. Hn istuu pydn ress p kumarassa ja kdet ojossa. Alan!
Alan! Jos sin et auta minua, niin min olen hukassa. He hirttvt
minut, Alan! Etk sin ymmrr? He hirttvt minut siit, mit olen
tehnyt."

"Ei maksa vaivaa pident tt keskustelua. Min kieltydyn jyrksti
kaikesta. Sin pyydt minulta mielettmyyksi."

"Sin siis kiellt?"

"Kielln."

"Min rukoilen sinua, Alan."

"Se on turhaa."

Dorian Grayn silmiin kohosi jlleen sama sliv ilme. Sitten hn ojensi
ktens, otti paperiliuskan ja kirjoitti siihen jotakin. Hn luki sen
kahdesti, taittoi sen huolellisesti kokoon ja tynsi sen pydn toiselle
puolelle. Kun hn oli sen tehnyt, niin hn nousi ja astui ikkunan luo.

Campbell katsoi ihmeissn hneen, otti sitten paperin kteens ja avasi
sen. Lukiessaan sit hnen kasvonsa muuttuivat kalman kalpeiksi, ja hn
vaipui tuolinnojaa vasten. Hirve pahoinvointi valtasi hnet. Hnest
tuntui iknkuin hnen sydmens olisi tykyttnyt kuoliaaksi tyhjss
ontelossa.

Hetken aikaa vallitsi kuolonhiljaisuus, sitten Dorian kntyi, astui
Campbellin taakse ja laski ktens hnen olkaplleen.

"Olen hyvin pahoillani sinun puolestasi, Alan", hn mutisi, "mutta
minulla ei ole valitsemisen varaa. Olen jo kirjoittanut kirjeen
valmiiksi. Kas tss se on. Sin net osoitteen. Jollet auta minua, niin
minun on pakko se lhett. Sin tiedt mit siit seuraa. Mutta
autathan sin minua. Nyt sinun on en mahdoton kielt. Min koetin
sst sinua. Jos olet oikeudenmukainen, niin sinun tytyy se
tunnustaa. Sin olet ollut taipumaton ja kova ja olet loukannut minua.
Sin olet kohdellut minua niinkuin ei kukaan muu ole uskaltanut minua
kohdella -- ei ainakaan kukaan elossa oleva. Min olen sietnyt kaikkea.
Nyt minun vuoroni on sanella ehtoja."

Campbell ktki kasvot ksiins ja hnen ruumiinsa vrhteli.

"Niin, minun vuoroni on nyt sanella ehdot, Alan. Sin tiedt mitk ne
ovat. Asia on aivan yksinkertainen. Kuules, l kiihoitu noin kovasti.
Ty on tehtv. Ole kylmverinen ja tee se."

Valitus psi Campbellin huulilta ja hn vapisi ylt'yleens. Kellon
tikutus uuninreunalla nytti jakavan ajan tuskan atomeihin, joista
jokaista oli liian raskasta kest. Hnest tuntui iknkuin
rautavannetta olisi hitaasti pingoitettu hnen otsansa ymprille,
iknkuin se hvistys, joka hnt uhkasi, olisi jo hnen ylitsens
tullut. Ksi hnen olkaplln oli raskas kuin lyijy. Sit oli mahdoton
kest. Se oli musertaa hnet kokonaan.

"Tule, Alan, sinun tytyy heti tehd ptksesi."

"Min en voi," hn sanoi koneellisesti, iknkuin sanat olisivat voineet
muuttaa asiaa.

"Sinun tytyy. Sinulla ei ole muuta valintaa. l viivyttele en."

Hn epri hetken aikaa. "Onko ylhll huoneessa uunia?"

"Siell on kivikuiduilla lmmitettv kaasu-uuni."

"Min menen kotiin hakemaan jotakin laboratoristani."

"Ei, Alan, sin et saa poistua talosta. Kirjoita paperiliuskalle mit
tarvitset, niin minun palvelijani saa lhte hakemaan."

Campbell piirsi pari rivi, pyyhki kirjoituksen imupainimella ja osoitti
kirjeen apulaiselleen. Dorian otti lipun ja luki sen huolellisesti.
Sitten hn soitti kelloa ja antoi sen palvelijalleen kskien hnen
palata takaisin niin pian kuin mahdollista ja tuoda tavarat mukanaan.

Kun eteisen ovi sulkeutui, niin Campbell nousi hermostuneesti tuoliltaan
ja astui uunin luo. Hn vapisi aivan kuin vilutautinen. Lhes
kahteenkymmeneen minuuttiin ei kumpainenkaan puhunut. Krpnen surisi
kovalla nell huoneessa ja kellon tikutus kuulosti vasaran iskulta.

Kun kello li yksi, niin Campbell knnhti ympri, ja katsoessaan
Dorian Grayhin hn nki hnen silmns kyyneliss. Noiden surumielisten
kasvojen puhtaus ja jalous raivostutti hnt. "Sin olet roisto,
halpamainen roisto!" hn mutisi.

"Hiljaa, Alan, sin olet pelastanut minun elmni," sanoi Dorian.

"Sinun elmsi? Hyv Jumala! Millainen elm se on! Sin olet kulkenut
turmeluksesta turmelukseen, ja nyt sin olet tekemll murhan kohonnut
korkeimpaan huippuun saakka. Suorittaessani sen tyn, joka minulla on
edess ja johon sin minut pakoitat, en ajattele sinun elmsi."

"Ah, Alan," mutisi Dorian huokaisten, "jospa sin tuntisit minua kohtaan
edes tuhannennen osan sit sli jota min tunnen sinua kohtaan." Hn
kntyi puhuessaan pois ja katseli ulos puutarhaan. Campbell ei
vastannut mitn.

Noin kymmenen minuutin jlkeen kuului kolkutusta ovelta ja palvelija
astui sisn tuoden muassaan suuren mahonkisen laatikon kemiallisine
aineineen, suuren ters- ja platinalankakrn sek kaksi omituisen
muotoista rautapuristinta.

"Jtnk nmt tnne, herra?" hn kysyi Campbellilta.

"Jttk vaan," sanoi Dorian. "Ja pelknp ett minulla on viel
toinenkin asia, Francis, jota teidn tulisi toimittaa. Mik sen miehen
nimi Richmondissa on, joka hankkii meille orkidejoja Selbyhyn?"

"Harden, herra."

"Niin -- Harden. Lhtek heti Richmondiin, koettakaa tavata itse
Hardenia ja pyytk ett hn toimittaa kahta vertaa enemmn orkidejoja
kuin mit min tilasin ja niin vhn valkoisia kuin suinkin. Tosiaankin,
en huoli valkoisista lainkaan. Ilma on kaunis, Francis, ja Richmond on
varsin soma paikka, muuten en teit vaivaisikaan sinne saakka."

"Ei se tee mitn, herra. Mihin aikaan minun pit olla kotona?"

Dorian katsahti Campbelliin.

"Pitknk aikaa sinun kokeesi kest, Alan?" hn sanoi levollisella,
vlinpitmttmll nell. Kolmannen henkiln lsnolo huoneessa
nytti antavan hnelle erinomaista rohkeutta.

Campbell rypisti kulmakarvojaan ja puri huultaan. "Noin viisi tuntia,"
hn vastasi.

"On kylliksi aikaista, jos olette puoli kahdeksan kotona, Francis. Tai
kuulkaahan: ottakaa esille mit tarvitsen pukeutumista varten. Voitte
saada vapaan illan. Min en sy pivllist kotona, niin etten tarvitse
teit."

"Kiitos, herra," sanoi mies poistuen huoneesta.

"No, Alan, ei ole aikaa hukata hetkekn. Kuinka raskas tm laatikko
on! Min kannan sen yls. Ota sin muut tavarat." Hn puhui nopeasti ja
kskevsti. Campbell tunsi olevansa voitettu. He lksivt yhdess
huoneesta.

Kun he tulivat yls, niin Dorian otti avaimen esiin ja vnsi lukkoa.
Sitten hn pyshtyi ja epriv katse kohosi hnen silmiins. Hnt
vrisytti. "En luule voivani tulla sisn, Alan," hn mutisi.

"Se on yhdentekev. En min sinua tarvitse," sanoi Campbell kylmsti.

Dorian avasi oven raolleen. Samalla hn huomasi kuvansa, joka irvisteli
auringon paisteessa. Maassa sen edess oli repaleinen verho. Hn muisti
ensi kertaa elissn unohtaneensa peitt tuon onnettoman kuvan ja oli
jo hykt sisn, kun hn samassa perytyikin vristen koko
ruumiissaan.

Mik inhottava punainen pilkku kuulsikaan mrkn ja kiiltvn kuvan
toisella kdell, iknkuin kangas olisi verta hikoillut? Miten hirve
se oli -- vielkin hirvittvmpi kuin tuo kangistunut olento, jonka hn
tiesi kyykttvn kumarassa pydn varassa, tuo olento, jonka muodoton
varjo verentahraamalla matolla ilmaisi hnelle, ettei se ollut
liikahtanut paikaltansa, vaan oli yh siin, minne hn sen oli
heittnyt.

Hn veti syvlt henken, avasi ovea hiukan enemmn ja puoleksi
suljetuin silmin, kasvot poisknnettyin, hn astui nopeasti sisn,
varmasti ptten olla vilkaisematta kuolleesen mieheen. Sitten hn
pyshtyi, nosti maasta kultapurppuraisen peitteen ja heitti sen kuvan
yli.

Hn ji paikoilleen seisomaan pelten knty taaksensa ja hnen
silmns kiintyivt verhon taiteelliseen kuosiin. Hn kuuli Campbellin
tuovan sisn raskaan laatikkonsa ja raudat ja muut tarpeet, jotka hn
oli haettanut julmaa tytns varten. Hn alkoi mietti tokko Campbell
ja Basil Hallward olivat koskaan tavanneet toisiansa ja jos olivat, niin
mit he olivat ajatelleet toisistansa.

"Jt minut nyt yksin," kuului kova ni hnen selkns takaa.

Dorian kntyi ja kiiruhti ulos. Hn huomasi vain ett kuollut oli
siirretty tuolin selknojaa vasten ja ett Campbell thysteli kiiltvi,
kellertvi kasvoja. Kun hn astui alas portaita, niin hn kuuli avaimen
vntyvn lukkoon.

Kello oli jo paljon yli seitsemn, kun Campbell palasi kirjastoon. Hn
oli kalpea, mutta aivan tyyni. "Min olen tehnyt mit sin halusit," hn
mutisi. "Ja nyt, j hyvsti. lkmme koskaan en nhk toisiamme."

"Sin olet pelastanut minut perikadosta, Alan. Sit en voi koskaan
unohtaa," sanoi Dorian yksinkertaisesti.

Heti kun Campbell oli lhtenyt, Dorian meni yls. Siell oli hirve
salpeterihapon lyhk. Mutta olento, joka oli istunut pydn ress,
oli kadonnut.




LUKU XV.


Samana iltana kello puoli yhdeksn saattoivat kumartavat palvelijat
Dorian Grayn lady Narboroughin vastaanottohuoneesen. Hnell oli hieno
seurustelupuku ylln ja suuri vihko parmalaisia orvokkeja napinlvess.
Hermot srkivt hurjasti hnen otsassansa ja hn oli hirven kiihtynyt,
mutta se tapa mill hn kumartui emnnn kden yli, oli yht kevyt ja
miellyttv kuin tavallisestikin. Ehk ihminen ei koskaan ole niin
luonteva kuin silloin, kun hnen on pakko nytell jotakin osaa.
Tietysti ei kukaan nhdessn Dorian Grayn tn iltana olisi voinut
aavistaa, ett hn oli ollut osallisena murhenytelmss, hirveimmss
mit meidn aikamme tuntee. Nuo hienomuotoiset sormet eivt koskaan
olleet voineet tarttua veitseen syntisess tarkoituksessa, nuo
hymyilevt huulet eivt koskaan olleet voineet pilkata Jumalaa ja
hyvyytt. Itsekn hn ei voinut olla ihmettelemtt omaa levollista
esiintymistns, ja hetken aikaa hn tunsi kaksoiselmn kauhistuttavaa
nautintoa.

Seura oli harvalukuinen, ja nytti silt kuin lady Narborough vain
kaikessa kiireess olisi sen koonnut luokseen. Hn oli viisas nainen ja
hnen ulkomuodossaan, niinkuin lordi Henryll oli tapana sanoa, nkyi
todellisen huomattavan rumuuden jljet. Hn oli ollut Englannin kaikkein
ikvystyttvimmn lhettiln kaikkein erinomaisin vaimo, ja haudattuaan
puolisonsa oman piirustuksensa mukaan laadittuun marmoriseen
hautakammioon ja naitettuaan tyttrens rikkaille, vanhanpuoleisille
miehille, hn antautui ranskalaisen kirjallisuuden, ranskalaisen kykin
ja, milloin hnell oli siihen vain tilaisuutta, ranskalaisen
_esprit'in_ nauttimiseen.

Dorian oli hnen suosikeitansa ja hn vakuutti hnelle aina iloitsevansa
siit, ettei hn ollut kohdannut hnt nuoruudessansa. "Min tiedn,
rakas ystv, ett olisin rakastunut teihin aivan mielettmsti",
hnell oli tapana sanoa, "ja ett olisin jttnyt kaikki teidn
thtenne. Sep onni, ettei teit ollut hankkeissakaan viel sill
kertaa. Sill totta tosiaan, min en ole edes keikaillutkaan kenenkn
kanssa. Kuitenkin se oli kokonaan Narboroughin vika. Hn oli hirven
likinkinen, eik miehest, joka ei ne kerrassaan mitn, ole
vhintkn huvia."

Hnen vieraansa tn iltana olivat varsin ikvi. Asia oli nimittin se
-- niinkuin hn kuluneen viuhkansa takaa selitti Dorianille -- ett yksi
hnen naiduista tyttristns oli kki tullut hnen luokseen
vierailemaan pitemmksi aikaa, ja mik vielkin pahempi, hn oli tuonut
miehens mukanaan. "Se oli hyvin epystvllist hnen puoleltansa, hyv
ystv", hn kuiskasi. "Tietysti min kyn heidn luonansa joka kes
palattuani Homburgista, mutta tarvitseehan vanha nainen joskus raitista
ilmaa, ja sit paitsi min saan heidt hiukan hereille. Te ette usko
millaista elm he kotonansa viettvt. Puhdasta, vrentmtnt
maalaiselm. He nousevat varhain yls, siksi ett heill on niin
paljon tyt, ja he panevat varhain maata, siksi ett heill on niin
vhn ajattelemista. Koko naapuristossa ei ole tapahtunut mitn
skandaalia kuningatar Elisabetin ajoista saakka ja seurauksena on se,
ett he nukahtavat kaikki heti pivllisen jlkeen. Teidn ei tarvitse
istua heidn vieressns. Te saatte paikkanne minun viereeni ja voitte
huvittaa minua."

Dorian mutisi jonkun kohteliaisuuden ja silmsi ymprilleen. Niin, se
oli todellakin ikv seura. Kahta henkil hn ei ollut koskaan ennen
nhnyt. Muut olivat: Ernest Harrowden, yksi noita keski-ikisi
keskinkertaisia ihmisi, joita on niin viljalti Lontoon klubeissa, noita
ihmisi, joilla ei ole vihollisia, mutta joita heidn ystvns eivt
myskn voi siet; lady Ruxton, seitsemnviidett vanha, prameileva,
koukkuneninen nainen, joka aina koetti nytt seikkailuihin
sekauneelta, mutta oli niin tavattoman ruma, ett hnen suureksi
suruksensa ei kukaan tahtonut uskoa mitn pahaa hnest; mrs. Erlynne,
tungetteleva nolla, joka sammalsi varsin suloisesti ja jonka tukka oli
vriltn venetsialaista punaa; lady Alice Chapman, emnnn tytr,
epaistikas, ikv nainen, jonka kasvot olivat tuota luonteenomaista
englantilaista lajia, jotka kerran nhtyns heti unohtaa; ja hnen
miehens, punaposkinen, valkopartainen olento, joka, samoinkuin niin
monet muut hnen sdystns, luuloitteli ett liioiteltu iloisuus voi
palkita tydellist ajatusten puutetta.

Dorian katui jo tuloansa, kun lady Narborough silmili suurta kullattua
kelloa, joka liikutteli iloisesti heiluriansa malvavreihin verhotulla
uuninreunuksella ja huudahti: "Miten inhottavaa ett Henry Wotton tulee
niin myhn! Min lhetin onnen kaupalla hnelle tn aamuna sanan, ja
hn lupasi pyhsti ettei hn pettisi minua."

Olihan se hiukan lohdullista, ett Harrykin tulisi sinne, ja kun ovi
avautui ja Dorian kuuli hnen hillityn musikaalisen nens lausuvan
jonkun valheen puolustuksekseen, niin hn ei tuntenut en ikv.

Mutta pydss ei ruoka hnelle maittanut. Lautanen toisensa jlkeen
kulki koskematta hnen ohitsensa. Lady Narborough nuhteli hnt koko
ajan ja sanoi, ett hn "loukkasi Adolphe parkaa, joka oli keksinyt koko
ruokalistan vain hnt varten", ja silloin-tllin lordi Henry silmsi
hneen pydn toiselta puolelta, ihmetellen, miksi hn oli niin
hiljainen ja hajamielinen. Aika-ajoin palvelija tytti hnen
shampanja-lasinsa. Hn joi kiihkesti ja hnen janonsa nytti vain
yltyvn.

"Dorian", sanoi lordi Henry vihdoin, kun jtel tarjottiin, "mik
sinua tn iltana vaivaa? Sin olet aivan muuttunut."

"Min luulen, ett hn on rakastunut", huudahti lady Narborough, "eik
hn uskalla tunnustaa sit minulle, sill hn pelk minun tulevan
mustasukkaiseksi. Hn onkin aivan oikeassa. Tietysti min tulisin
mustasukkaiseksi."

"Hyv lady Narborough", mutisi Dorian hymyillen, "min en ole ollut
rakastunut kokonaiseen viikkoon -- en totta tosiaan siit saakka kuin
madame de Ferrol lksi kaupungista".

"Kuinka te miehet voitte rakastua sellaiseen naiseen!" huudahti lady
Narborough. "Sit en tosiaankaan voi ksitt."

"Se on vain siksi, ett hn muistaa teidt, sellaisena kuin te olitte
pikku tyttn, lady Narborough", sanoi lordi Henry. "Hn on renkaana
meidn ja teidn lyhyitten hameittenne vlill."

"Hn ei muista lainkaan minun lyhyit hameitani, lordi Henry. Mutta min
muistan hnet varsin hyvin Wieniss kolmekymment vuotta sitten ja
kuinka _decollete_ hn silloin oli."

"Hn on yh vielkin _decollete_", vastasi lordi Henry, tarttuen
pitkill sormillaan oliivimarjaan; "ja kun hnell on ylln oikein
komea puku, niin hn on aivan kuin jonkun huonon ranskalaisen romaanin
korupainos. Hn on todellakin ihmeellinen ja tynn ylltyksi. Hnen
taipumuksensa perhe-idylleihin on aivan verraton. Kun hnen kolmas
miehens kuoli, niin hnen hiuksensa muuttuivat aivan kultaisiksi
surusta."

"Kuinka sin voit puhua tuolla tavalla, Harry!" huudahti Dorian.

"Hyvin romantinen selitys", naureskeli talon emnt. "Mutta hnen kolmas
miehens, lordi Henry! Ettehn vit ett Ferrol olisi jo neljs?"

"Tietysti, lady Narborough."

"Min en usko siit sanaakaan."

"Hyv, kysyk mr. Graylt. Hn on hnen lhimpi ystvin."

"Onko se totta, mr. Gray?"

"Hn vakuutti sit minulle, lady Narborough", sanoi Dorian. "Min kysyin
hnelt oliko hn, samoinkuin Margareta Navarralainen, balsameerannut
heidn sydmens ja ripustanut ne vyllens. Hn vastasi ettei hn ollut
sit tehnyt sen vuoksi, ettei yhdellkn heist ollut sydnt."

"Nelj miest! Kunniani kautta, se on liiallista intoa."

"Liika rohkeutta, siksi min sit sanoisin", sanoi Dorian.

"Oi, hnell on rohkeutta vaikka mihin, hyv ystv. Ja millainen on
Ferrol? Min en tunne hnt."

"Hyvin kauniitten naisten miehet kuuluvat rikollisten luokkaan", sanoi
lordi Henry, maistellen viinin.

Lady Narborough napautti hnt viuhkallaan. "En ihmettele yhtn, vaikka
maailma sanoo teit hyvin ilkeksi."

"Mutta mik maailma?" kysyi lordi Henry kohauttaen kulmakarvojaan.
"Luultavasti vain tuleva maailma. Sill maailma ja min tulemme hyvin
toimeen toistemme kanssa."

"Jokainen minun tuttavani sanoo, ett te olette hyvin ilke", sanoi
vanha nainen pyritten ptn.

Lordi Henry nytti vakavalta hetken aikaa. "Se on kerrassaan
inhottavaa", sanoi hn vihdoin, "kuinka ihmiset nykyn puhuvat toisten
seln takana asioita, jotka ovat aivan tosia."

"Eik hn ole parantumaton?" huudahti Dorian nojautuen eteenpin
tuolillaan.

"Toivottavasti", sanoi talon emnt nauraen. "Mutta totta tosiaan, jos
te kaikki ihailette madame de Ferrolia noin naurettavalla tavalla, niin
tytynee minunkin menn uusiin naimisiin tullakseni muotiin."

"Te ette mene uusiin naimisiin, lady Narborough", sanoi lordi Henry. "Te
olette ollut liian onnellinen. Kun nainen menee uusiin naimisiin, niin
hn tekee sen siksi, ett hn inhosi ensimist miestn. Mies sit
vastoin menee uusiin naimisiin sen vuoksi, ett hn ihaili ensimist
vaimoaan. Naiset koettavat onneaan; miehet panevat onnensa alttiiksi."

"Narborough ei ollut tydellinen", sanoi vanha nainen.

"Jos hn olisi sit ollut, niin te ette olisi rakastanut hnt, rakas
lady Narborough", kuului vastaus. "Naiset rakastavat meit vikojemme
vuoksi. Jos meill on vain kylliksi vikoja, niin he antavat meille mit
tahansa anteeksi, vielp nerokkaisuutemmekin. Pelknp ettette kutsu
minua en koskaan pivllisille tmn jlkeen, lady Narborough; mutta
se on aivan totta."

"Tietysti se on totta, lordi Henry. Jos me naiset emme rakastaisi teit
vikojenne vuoksi, niin miten teidn kvisi? Ei yksikn teist psisi
naimisiin. Te olisitte vain joukko onnettomia poikamiehi. Vaikka eihn
se teit paljoa parantaisi. Nykyn kaikki naineet miehet elvt kuin
poikamiehet ainakin, ja kaikki poikamiehet kuin naineet miehet."

"_Fin de sicle_" [Vuosisadan loppu], mutisi lordi Henry.

"_Fin de globe_" [Maailman loppu], vastasi talon emnt.

"Min toivoisin ett olisi _fin de globe_", sanoi Dorian huoaten. "Elm
on suuri pettymys."

"Ah, hyv ystv", sanoi lady Narborough, veten hansikkaat kteens,
"lk sanoko, ett te olette kyllstynyt elmn. Kun mies sen sanoo,
niin silloin on varmaa, ett elm on saanut hnest tarpeeksi. Lordi
Henry on hyvin paha ihminen, ja min toivon joskus ett olisin ollut
sellainen minkin; mutta te olette luotu hyvksi -- te nyttte niin
hyvlt. Min hankin teille soman vaimon. Lordi Henry, ettek arvele,
ett mr. Grayn pitisi menn naimisiin?"

"Sit min olen aina sanonut hnelle, lady Narborough", sanoi lordi
Henry kumartaen.

"No niin, koettakaamme saada hnet hyviin naimisiin. Min lupaan kyd
lpi Debrettin sukukirjan tn iltana ja laitan listan kaikista
sopivista nuorista naisista."

"Ja samallako mys luettelon heidn istns, lady Narborough?" kysyi
Dorian.

"Tietysti mys heidn istns -- hiukan korjattuna. Mutta ei mitn
pid kiireell suorittaa. Min tahtoisin, ett siit tulisi sopiva
liitto, niinkuin _Morning Post_ sanoo, ja soisin ett te molemmat
tulisitte onnellisiksi."

"Mit loruja ihmiset puhuvat onnellisista avioliitoista!" huudahti lordi
Henry. "Mies voi olla onnellinen jokaisen naisen kanssa niin kauan kuin
hn ei rakasta naista."

"Ah! mik kyynikko te olette!" huudahti vanha nainen tynten tuoliaan
edemmksi pydst ja nykten lady Ruxtonille. "Teidn pit tulla taas
pian minun luokseni pivllisille. Te olette todellakin erinomainen
hermojen vahvistaja, paljoa parempi kuin kaikki ne lkkeet, joita sir
Andrew on minulle mrnnyt. Mutta teidn tytyy sanoa minulle, keit te
tahtoisitte tll tavata. Min haluaisin kutsua oikein hauskan seuran."

"Min pidn miehist, joilla on tulevaisuutta ja naisista, joilla on
entisyytt", hn vastasi. "Vai luuletteko te ett siit syntyisi
naisvalta?"

"Pelknp pahoin", sanoi lady Narborough nauraen ja nousi samalla yls.
"Suokaa anteeksi, rakas lady Ruxton", hn lissi, "en huomannut ett te
ette viel ollut polttanut paperossianne loppuun."

"Ei se tee mitn, lady Narborough. Min poltan aivan liiaksi. Min
koetan vast'edes olla kohtuullisempi."

"lk huoliko, lady Ruxton", sanoi lordi Henry. "Kohtuus on arveluttava
asia. 'Kyll' ei ole sen parempaa kuin niukka ateria. 'Liika' on melkein
kuin juhla."

Lady Ruxton katseli hnt uteliaasti. "Teidn pit tulla selittmn
sit minulle tarkemmin jonakuna iltapuolena, lordi Henry. Se tuntuu
varsin ihastuttavalta teorialta", hn mutisi astuessaan ulos huoneesta.

"lk nyt istuko liian kauan politiikkanne ja juorujenne ress",
huudahti lady Narborough ovelta. "Jos te sen teette, niin me alamme
varmaan riidell ylkerrassa."

Herrat nauroivat, ja mr. Chapman nousi juhlallisesti yls pydn
alapst ja lksi ylphn. Dorian Gray muutti paikkaansa ja meni
istumaan lordi Henryn viereen. Mr. Chapman alkoi puhua kovalla nell
alahuoneen olosuhteista. Hn oli raivoissaan vastustajilleen. Sana
_doktrinrinen_ -- kauhuaherttv sana kaikille englantilaisille --
kohosi silloin-tllin esiin keskell hnen puheenpaukettansa. Hn
kytti mielelln alkusointuja puheensa koristuksena. Hn nosti "Union
Jack" lipun aina ajatuksen korkeimmalle harjalle saakka. Hn todisti
ett rodun perinnllinen typeryys -- hn nimitti sit hyvntahtoisesti
"englantilaiseksi terveeksi jrjeksi" -- oli seuraelmn paras tuki.

Hymyily karehti lordi Henryn huulilla, ja hn kntyi katsoen Dorianiin.

"Voitko paremmin, hyv ystv?" hn kysyi. "Sin et nyttnyt olevan
hyviss voimissa pivllisten aikana."

"Voin aivan hyvin, Harry. Olen vain vsynyt. Siin kaikki."

"Sin olit ihastuttava eilen illalla. Pikku herttuatar oli aivan
hurmautunut sinuun. Hn sanoi kyvns Selbyss."

"Hn on luvannut tulla sinne kahdentenakymmenenten pivn."

"Tuleeko Monmouth mys sinne?"

"Tulee, Harry."

"Hn ikvystytt minua hirvesti, melkein yht paljon kuin
herttuatartakin. Herttuatar on hyvin viisas, liian viisas ollakseen
nainen. Hnelt puuttuu heikkouden sanomatonta suloutta. Savijalat, ne,
ne tekevt kuvapatsaan kullan arvokkaaksi. Hnen jalkansa ovat
erinomaisen kauniit, mutta ne eivt ole savesta. Valkoista porsliinia,
jos niin tahdot. Ne ovat kyneet tulen lpi; ja mit tuli ei polta, sen
se karaisee. Hnell on kokemusta."

"Kuinka kauan hn on ollut naimisissa?" kysyi Dorian.

"Iankaikkisuuden, hn vakuuttaa minulle. Minun luullakseni
aateliskalenterin mukaan kymmenen vuotta, mutta kymmenen vuoden aika
Monmouthin kanssa lienee yht pitk kuin koko iankaikkisuus. Kuka muu
tulee?"

"Ah, Willoughbyt, lordi Rugby ja hnen vaimonsa, meidn emntmme,
Geoffrey Clouston, koko tavallinen seura. Olen kutsunut mys lordi
Grotrianin."

"Hn miellytt minua", sanoi lordi Henry. "Useat eivt pid hnest,
mutta minun mielestni hn on ihastuttava. Hn pukeutuu joskus liian
ylellisesti, mutta hn hyvitt sen kokonaan ylikultuurillansa. Hn on
hyvin uudenaikainen tyyppi."

"En tied, tokko hn voi tulla, Harry. Hnen tytyy ehk lhte isns
kanssa Monte Carloon."

"Ah! miten vaivalloisia ihmisten omaiset voivat olla! Koeta saada hnt
mukaan. Johtuupa mieleeni, Dorian, sin lksit kovin varhain kotiin
eilen illalla. Lksit jo ennen yhttoista. Mit sin teit sen jlkeen.
Menitk suoraan kotiin?"

Dorian silmsi hneen nopeasti ja rypisti kulmakarvojaan. "En, Harry",
hn sanoi vihdoin, "en tullut kotiin ennenkuin lhemms kolmea."

"Menitk klubiin?"

"Menin", hn vastasi. Sitten hn puri huultaan. "Ei, en min sit
tarkoita. En min mennyt klubiin. Min kvelin. En muista, mit tein...
Kuinka utelias sin olet, Harry! Sin tahdot aina tiet mit muut ovat
tehneet. Min koetan aina unohtaa mit itse olen tehnyt. Min tulin
kotiin puoli kolme, jos tahdot tiet ajan tarkalleen. Olin unohtanut
avaimen kotiin ja palvelijani psti minut sisn. Jos tahdot saada sen
todistetuksi, niin voit kysy hnelt."

Lordi Henry kohautti olkapitn. "Rakas ystv, mitp min sit
tarvitsisin! Mennn yls vierashuoneesen. Kiitos, ei sherry, mr.
Chapman. Jotain on tapahtunut sinulle, Dorian. Sano, mit se on. Sin et
tn iltana ole oma itsesi."

"l huoli minusta, Harry. Min olen kiihoittunut, pahalla tuulella.
Min tulen huomenna sinun luoksesi, tai ylihuomenna. Vie terveiseni lady
Narboroughille. Min en tule yls. Min menen kotiin. Minun tytyy
lhte kotiin."

"Hyv, Dorian. Toivon ett tulet huomenna teet juomaan, herttuatarkin
tulee."

"Koetan tulla, Harry", hn sanoi poistuen huoneesta. Kun hn ajoi
kotiin, niin hn tunsi, ett kauhuntunne, jonka hn oli luullut jo
kadonneen, oli palannut takaisin. Lordi Henryn satunnaiset kysymykset
olivat hetkeksi saattaneet hnet pois suunniltaan, ja hn tarvitsi koko
mielenmalttinsa. Vaaralliset esineet olivat hvitettvt. Hnt
vrisytti. Hn tunsi vastenmielisyytt vain ajatellessaankin niiden
liikuttamista.

Mutta se oli tehtv. Hn tiesi sen, ja kun hn oli sulkenut kirjastonsa
oven, niin hn avasi salaisen kaapin, jonne hn oli heittnyt Basil
Hallwardin pllystakin ja laukun. Tuli paloi uunissa. Hn heitti siihen
uuden halon. Krventyneen kankaan ja palavan nahan haju oli hirve.
Kesti kokonaista kolmeneljnnestuntia ennenkuin kaikki oli hvinnyt.
Lopulta hn oli aivan vsynyt ja pahoinvoipa. Hn sytytti palamaan
muutamia algierilaisia pastilleja kupariseen hiilipannuun ja pesi
ktens ja otsansa kylmll myskinhajuisella etikalla.

kki hn spshti. Hnen silmns alkoivat oudosti loistaa ja hn puri
hermostuneesti alahuultansa. Ikkunoiden vliss seisoi suuri
firenzelinen ebenholtsinen kaappi, jonka silaukset olivat norsunluuta
ja sinist lapista. Hn katseli sit iknkuin se olisi samalla kertaa
hnt hurmannut ja peloittanut, iknkuin siin olisi ollut jotain, jota
hn kaipasi ja samalla inhosi. Hn hengitti kiivaammin. Mieletn halu
sai vallan hness. Hn sytytti paperossin ja heitti sen pois. Hnen
silmluomensa painuivat alas, jotta pitkt silmripset miltei
koskettivat poskia. Mutta sittenkin hn piti kaappia silmll. Vihdoin
hn nousi yls sohvalta, jonne hn oli heittytynyt, astui kaapin luo ja
avattuaan sen, hn kosketteli jotakin salaista vieteri. Kolmikulmainen
laatikko tyntytyi hitaasti esille. Hnen sormensa liikkuivat
vaistomaisesti sit kohti, tunkeutuivat sisn ja tarttuivat johonkin
kiinni. Se oli pieni, taiteellisesti tehty kiinalainen rasia, jonka
mustalla kiiltvll pinnalla oli kultaply, sivuja pitkin kulki
aaltomaisia viivoja ja silkkisiss nauhoissa riippui pyreit
kristalleja, joiden tupsut olivat tehdyt punotusta metallilangasta. Hn
avasi sen. Sisll oli vihret, vahamaista, kiiltv tahdasta, jonka
haju oli lpitunkevaa ja raskasta.

Hn epri hetken, kasvoilla kummallinen, jhmettynyt piirre. Sitten hn
vrisi iknkuin vilusta, vaikka huoneessa oli hirven kuuma ja katseli
kelloaan. Se oli kahtakymment vailla kaksitoista. Hn pani rasian
paikoilleen, sulki kaapin ovet ja meni makuuhuoneesensa.

Kun keskiyn pronssiset lynnit kajahtivat pimen ilmaan, niin Dorian
Gray hiipi hiljaa ulos talosta huonoissa pukimissa, paksu kaulahuivi
kaulassa. Bond streetilt hn tapasi ajurin, jolla oli hyv hevonen. Hn
huusi sit ja ilmoitti hnelle hiljaisella nell osoitteen.

Mies pudisti ptn. "Sinne on liian pitk matka", hn mutisi.

"Tst saatte sovereignin", sanoi Dorian. "Saatte viel toisenkin, jos
ajatte nopeasti."

"Hyv, herra", vastasi mies, "tunnissa olette perill", ja kun Dorian
Gray oli astunut ajoneuvoihin, niin tm knsi hevosensa ja ajoi
nopeasti jokirantaa kohti.




LUKU XVI.


Kylm sade alkoi tihkua ja likaiset katulyhdyt loistivat
aaveentapaisesti kostean sumun lpi. Huvipaikkoja juuri suljettiin ja
hmri mies- ja naisolentoja seisoi ryhmiss niiden ulkopuolella.
Muutamista kapakoista kajahti raakaa naurua. Toisissa juopuneet
riitelivt ja huusivat.

Nojautuneena ajopelien selknojaan, hattu niskassa, Dorian Gray
tarkasteli suuren kaupungin likaisia hpepaikkoja, ja silloin-tllin
toisti itsekseen niit sanoja, joita lordi Henry oli lausunut hnelle
ensi pivn heidn kohdatessaan toisensa: "Sielu on parannettava
aistien avulla ja aistit sielun avulla." Niin, siin koko salaisuus
olikin. Hn oli sit useasti koettanut ja hn tahtoi sit nytkin
koettaa. Oli opiumiravintoloita, joissa saattoi ostaa unohdusta, ja
muita kauheita pesi, joissa saattoi vanhojen syntien muiston upottaa
uusien syntien huumeesen.

Kuu riippui alhaalla taivaalla aivan kuin kellertv kallo. Aika-ajoin
ojensi suunnaton, muodoton pilvi pitkn ksivartensa sen yli ja peitti
sen kokonaan. Lyhdyt harvenivat harvenemistaan, kadut kapenivat ja
tulivat yh synkemmiksi. Ajuri ajoi harhaan, ja sai palata puolen
peninkulmaa takaisin. Hyry nousi hevosesta sen loiskiessa
vesiltkiss. Ajoneuvojen sivuikkunoita peitti harmaa sumu.

"Sielu on parannettava aistien avulla ja aistit sielun avulla!" Miten
nuo sanat soivat hnen korvissansa! Hnen sielunsa, se oli kuoleman
sairas. Voisivatko aistit sit todellakin parantaa? Viatonta verta oli
vuodatettu. Mik sen voisi sovittaa? Ah! sellaista ei kynyt
sovittaminen; mutta vaikka anteeksianto olikin mahdotonta, niin unohdus
oli sittenkin jljell, ja hn oli pttnyt unohtaa, hvitt sen
perinpohjin, musertaa sen kuin kyykrmeen, joka on pistnyt jalkaan.
Niin todellakin, mik oikeus Basililla oli ollut puhua hnelle sill
tavalla kuin hn oli puhunut? Kuka oli kskenyt hnt tuomitsemaan
toisia? Hn oli sanonut hnelle hirveit asioita, joita oli mahdoton
siet.

Ajoneuvot hytkyivt yh eteenpin, joka askeleelta yh hitaammin, niin
ainakin hnest tuntui. Hn laski ikkunan alas ja kski miehen ajaa
nopeammin. Hirve opiumin nlk alkoi hnt kalvaa. Hnen kurkkuaan
poltti ja hnen hienot ktens puristuivat hermostuneesti. Hn li kuin
hullu kepilln hevosta. Ajuri nauroi ja iski piiskallansa. Dorian
naurahti mys ja mies vaikeni.

Matka tuntui loppumattomalta ja kadut nyttivt iknkuin mustalta
monimutkaiselta hmhkinverkolta. Yksitoikkoisuus kvi sietmttmksi,
ja kun sumu yh vain sakeni, niin hnt alkoi peloittaa.

Sitten he kulkivat yksinisten tiilitehtaiden ohi. Siell sumu oli
kevyemp, ja hn saattoi eroittaa niiden omituiset pullonmuotoiset
uunit, joista liekehti oransivrisi, viuhkanmuotoisia kiellekkeit.
Koira haukkui heit, ja kaukaa pimeydest kuului liitelevn lokin ni.
Hevonen kompastui raiteesen, sikhtyi ja alkoi nelist.

Hetken kuluttua savitie ji heidn taakseen ja ajoneuvot ratisivat
jlleen huonosti kivetyill kaduilla. Useimmat ikkunat olivat pimet,
silloin-tllin vain nkyi ihmeellisi varjokuvia valaistuja
ikkunaverhoja vasten. Hn katseli niit uteliaasti. Ne liikkuivat kuin
jttilisnuket, ja liikuttivat ksin kuin elvt olennot. Hn vihasi
niit. Hn tunsi raivoa sydmessn. Kun he kntyivt kadun
kulmauksesta, niin joku nainen huusi heille jotakin avonaisesta ovesta,
ja kaksi miest juoksi heidn jlkeens noin sadan metrin verran. Ajuri
uhkasi heit piiskallansa.

Sanotaan ett intohimot saattavat ajatukset kiertmn kehss. Ja
varmaa on ett Dorian Grayn rikkipurrut huulet uudistivat kiusallisen
yksitoikkoisesti noita sanoja sielusta ja aisteista, kunnes ne hnen
mielestn sattuvasti ilmaisivat hnen oman mielentilansa, samalla kuin
ne, vaatien itselleen jrjen hyvksymist, puolustivat intohimoja,
joiden vallassa hn ilman tuollaista puolustustakin olisi ollut. Tuo
yksi ainoa ajatus hiipi hnen aivoissansa solusta soluun; ja hurja
elmisen himo, kauhistuttavin kaikista inhimillisist haluista,
kiihoitti jokaista hnen hermoansa. Rumuus, jota hn ennen oli vihannut,
sen vuoksi ett se teki kaikki niin todelliseksi, muuttui nyt samasta
syyst hnelle rakkaaksi. Rumuus yksin oli todellista. Raaka rhin,
inhottavat pest, hillittmn elmn hurja voima, hylkiiden ja
varkaiden pahuus, kaikki tuo oli todellisempaa voimakkaan, elvn
vaikutuksensa vuoksi kuin kaikki taiteen suloiset muodot ja laulun
uneksivat varjot. Niit juuri hn tarvitsi voidakseen unohtaa. Kolmessa
pivss hn olisi vapaa.

kki ajuri nykisemll pyshdytti hevosen pimen kujan pss. Talojen
matalien kattojen ja pykllaitaisten savupiippujen takaa kohosivat
laivojen mustat mastot. Valkea sumu kierteli raakapuissa kuin
aaveentapaiset purjeet.

"Nill tienoin, herra, vai kuinka?" kysyi ajuri khell nell
luukusta.

Dorian stkhti ja tirkisteli ymprilleen. "Hyv on", hn vastasi ja
astuttuaan nopeasti ulos ja annettuaan lupaamansa lismaksun ajurille,
hn astui kiireesti rantaa kohti. Siell-tll loisti lyhdynvalo jonkun
suuren kauppalaivan perlt. Sen heijastus vreili ja pirstautui
vesiltkiss. Punainen tuli kuulsi pitkmatkaisesta laivasta, joka
lastasi hiili. Niljakas katukivitys oli aivan kuin mrk sadetakki.

Dorian kiiruhti vasemmalle vilkaisten silloin-tllin taaksensa, tokko
kukaan hnt jljest seuraisi. Seitsemss tai kahdeksassa minuutissa
hn saapui pienen rnstyneen talon edustalle, joka oli ahdettu kahden
rappeutuneen tehtaan vliin. Ullakkoikkunassa oli tulta. Hn pyshtyi ja
kolkutti sovitulla tavalla.

Hetken kuluttua hn kuuli askelia kytvst ja ketju irroitettiin
ovesta. Ovi avautui hiljaa ja Dorian astui sisn sanomatta sanaakaan
tuolle muodottomalle olennolle, joka vetytyi syrjn, kun hn astui
ohi. Eteisen perll riippui repaleinen, vihre verho, se liehui ja
lepatteli edes-takaisin kovassa tuulenhengess, joka seurasi hnen
kintereilln sisn. Hn veti sen syrjn ja astui pitkn, matalaan
huoneesen, joka nytti ennen olleen kolmannen luokan tanssisali.
Kirkkaat, levottomat kaasuliekit, jotka himmein ja vristettyin
kuvastuivat vastakkaisella seinll olevissa, krpsen likaamissa
peileiss piirittivt seini. Rasvaiset, rihlatusta tinasta tehdyt
valonheijastajat niiden takana heittivt vrjvi valotpli ympri
huonetta. Lattialla oli keltaista sahajauhoa, jossa siell-tll oli
lokaa ja mustia tahroja maahan kaadetusta likrist. Muutamia
malaijilaisia kyyktti pienen hiiliuunin ymprill pelaten luurahoilla
ja nytten valkoisia hampaitaan puhuessansa. Nurkassa, p kden
varassa, istui merimies kumartuneena pydn yli, ja koreasti maalatun
tarjoilupydn ress, joka kulki pitkin toista pitk sein, seisoi
kaksi kuihtunutta naista laskien leikki vanhan miehen kanssa, joka
innolla harjasi takkinsa hihoja. "Hn luulee saaneensa punaisia
muurahaisia plleen", naureskeli toinen heist kun Dorian kulki ohi.
Mies katsoi naiseen kauhun vallassa ja alkoi vikist.

Huoneen perll olivat pienet portaat, jotka johtivat hmrn
huoneesen. Kun Dorian hykksi niiden kolmea kulunutta askelta yls,
niin raskas opiumin lyhk henksi hnt vastaan. Hn veti syvlt
henken ja hnen sieramensa vrhtivt tyydytyksest. Kun hn astui
sisn, niin nuori keltatukkainen mies, joka seisoi kumartuneena lampun
yli ja sytytti pitk piippuaan, katsahti hneen ja nykytti ptn
hiukan epriden.

"Oletko sin tll, Adrian?" mutisi Dorian.

"Miss muualla min olisin?" hn vastasi vlinpitmttmsti. "Eihn
kukaan en tahdo seurustella minun kanssani."

"Min luulin sinun lhteneen pois Englannista."

"Darlington ei aio nostaa kannetta minua vastaan. Veljeni maksoi vihdoin
vekselin. George ei myskn puhuttele minua... Minulle se onkin
yhdentekev", hn lissi huoaten. "Niinkauan kuin ihmisell on tt
tavaraa, niin hn ei tarvitsekkaan ystvi. Luulenpa, ett minulla on
ollut liian monta ystv".

Dorian spshti ja katseli luonnottomia olentoja ymprilln, jotka
makasivat eriskummallisissa asennoissa repaleisilla patjoilla.
Vristyneet jsenet, ammottavat suut ja jykt, loistottomat silmt
lumosivat hnet. Hn tiesi, miss ihmeellisiss taivaissa he nyt
kituivat ja miss synkiss helveteiss uusien nautintojen salaisuudet
heille selvisivt. Heidn tilansa oli parempi kuin hnen omansa. Ajatus
oli kahlehtinut hnet. Muisto, iknkuin jokin kauhea tauti, syvytti
hnen sydntns. Vh-vli hn oli nkevinn Basil Hallwardin silmt,
jotka tarkastelivat hnt. Mutta tnne hn ei sittenkn voinut jd.
Adrian Singletonin lsnolo hiritsi hnt. Hn tahtoi olla sellaisessa
paikassa, miss ei kukaan tiennyt kuka hn oli. Hn tahtoi paeta omaa
itsen.

"Min menen toiseen paikkaan", hn sanoi hetken kuluttua.

"Varviinko?"

"Niin."

"Villikissa on varmaan siell. He eivt huoli hnest en tnne."

Dorian ravisti olkapitn. "Min olen kyllstynyt rakastuneihin
naisiin. Naiset, jotka vihaavat meit, ovat paljoa hauskemmat. Sit
paitsi olo siell on parempi."

"Jokseenkin yht hyv."

"Min pidn siit enemmn. Juokaamme jotakin. Minun pit saada jotakin
suuhuni."

"Min en halua mitn", sanoi nuorukainen.

"Tule pois vain."

Adrian Singleton nousi haluttomasti yls ja seurasi hnen mukanaan
tarjoilupydn luo. Mulatti, repaleisessa turbaanissa ja likaisessa
pllystakissa tervehti ilkesti irvistellen asettaessaan pullollisen
konjakkia ja kaksi lasia heidn eteens. Naiset tulivat lhemmksi ja
alkoivat jutella. Dorian knsi heille selkns ja sanoi jotakin hiljaa
Adrian Singletonille.

Toisen naisen suu vetytyi virnistelevn hymyyn. "Kopeitapa tnpivn
ollaan", naureskeli hn.

"Herran thden, lk puhuko minulle mitn", huusi Dorian polkien
jalkaa. "Mit te tahdotte? Rahaako? Tss on. Mutta lk en koskaan
puhutelko minua."

Kaksi punaista tulta syttyi hetkeksi naisen phttyneihin silmiin,
sitten ne sammuivat taas, ja silmt olivat yht himmet ja loistottomat
kuin ennenkin. Hn heitti ptn ja pyyhkisi ahneesti kdelln rahat
pydlt. Hnen toverinsa katseli hnt kateellisesti.

"Ei maksa vaivaa", huokasi Adrian Singleton. "En min huoli palata
takaisin. Mit se hydyttisi? Minun on hyv olla tll."

"Kirjoitathan minulle jos tarvitset jotakin, eik totta?" sanoi Dorian
hetken kuluttua.

"Ehk."

"Hyv yt sitten."

"Hyv yt", vastasi nuorukainen nousten yls portaita myten ja pyyhki
haljenneita huuliaan nenliinalla.

Dorian astui ovelle kasvoillaan tuskallinen piirre. Kun hn veti
oviverhon syrjn, niin raakaa naurua kajahti sen naisen maalatuilta
huulilta, joka oli ottanut hnelt rahaa vastaan. "Siin menee se
perkeleen pukari!" hn nikotti kovalla nell.

"Kirottu nainen!" Dorian vastasi, "l nimit minua siksi."

Nainen naputti sormiaan. "Satuprinssin nimell sin tahtoisit kyd,
eik totta", hn huusi hnen jlkeens.

Uninen merimies hykksi pystyyn kuullessaan nuo naisen sanat ja katseli
hurjana ymprilleen. Hn kuuli eteisen oven sulkeutuvan kiinni. Hn
hykksi ulos iknkuin ajaen jotakin takaa.

Dorian Gray kiiruhti sateessa rantaa pitkin. Hn tunsi outoa liikutusta
ajatellessaan Adrian Singletonia, jonka hn aivan sattumalta oli
tavannut, ja hn mietti, tokko tuon nuoren elmn hvi todellakin oli
hnen syyksens luettava, niinkuin Basil Hallward niin hvyttmsti oli
vittnyt. Hn puri huultaan ja hetkeksi hnen silmiins tuli surullinen
ilme. Vaikka mitp se hnt liikutti? Ihmisen elm oli liian lyhyt,
jotta hn voisi kantaa olkapilln toisen erehdyksi. Jokainen eli omaa
elmns ja sai maksaa siit oman hintansa. Sli vain, ett tytyi
niin monta kertaa maksaa samasta erehdyksest. Tytyi todellakin maksaa
yh uudestaan ja uudestaan. Kohtalon ja ihmisten vlisiss asioissa ei
koskaan tehty tilinptst.

On olemassa hetki, niin psykologit sanovat, jolloin synninhimo tai se
mit maailma sanoo synniksi, niin kokonaan valtaa luonnon, ett jokainen
hermo ruumiissa, jokainen aivojen solu on hirvess kiihoituksessa.
Miehet ja naiset sellaisina hetkin kadottavat kokonaan tahdon vapauden.
He kulkevat hirve loppuaan kohti kuin koneet. Heill ei ole en
mitn valintaa, ja omatunto on kuollut, tai jos se viel el, niin se
el vain listkseen kapinan viehtyst ja tottelemattomuuden
hurmausta. Sill kaikki synnit, niinkuin teologit vsymttmsti meille
muistuttavat, ovat tottelemattomuuden purkauksia. Kun tuo korkea henki,
pahuuden aamuthti, syksyi alas taivaasta, niin hn kaatui
kapinoitsijana.

Tunteettomana, syntiin taipuvana, tahratuin mielin ja sielu kapinaa
janoavana Dorian Gray kiiruhti eteenpin, kulkien yh nopeammin. Mutta
juuri kun hn aikoi knty pimen holvikytvn, jota oikotiet hn
usein oli kulkenut mennessn ersen pahamaiseen paikkaan, niin joku
kki takaa pyshdytti hnet, ja ennenkuin hn ehti puolustautuakaan,
pusertui hn vasten sein ja vahva ksi tarttui hnt kurkkuun kiinni.

Hn taisteli hurjasti henkens puolesta ja hirvell ponnistuksella hn
riistytyi irti tukehduttavasta puristuksesta. Samassa hn kuuli
revolverin hanaa viritettvn ja nki kiiltvn piipun vlkkyvn aivan
pns kohdalla, sek lyhyen ja lihavanpuolisen miehen hmrsti
hmittvn edessns.

"Mit te tahdotte?" sanoi Dorian lhtten.

"Olkaa hiljaa", sanoi mies. "Jos liikahdatte, niin min ammun teidt."

"Te olette hullu. Mit min olen teille tehnyt?"

"Te turmelitte Sibyl Vanen elmn", kuului vastaus. "Sibyl Vane oli
sisareni. Hn surmasi itsens. Sen tiedn. Hnen kuolemansa on teidn
omallatunnollanne. Min vannoin tappavani teidt. Vuosikausia olen teit
etsinyt. Minulla ei ollut minknlaista johdatusta eik jlke. Ne
molemmat, jotka olisivat voineet antaa teist tunnusmerkkej, olivat
kuolleet. Min en tiennyt teist mitn muuta kuin sen lempinimen, jolla
sisareni teit nimitti. Sattumalta kuulin sen tn iltana. Tehk tili
Jumalanne kanssa, sill tn iltana te kuolette."

Dorian Gray oli aivan jhmettynyt pelosta. "Min en koskaan ole tuntenut
hnt", hn nkytti. "En koskaan ole kuullutkaan hnest. Te olette
hullu."

"Parempi ett tunnustaisitte syntinne, sill niin totta kuin min olen
James Vane, teidn tytyy kuolla." Seurasi kauhea hetki. Dorian ei
tiennyt mit tehd. "Alas polvillenne!" rjyi mies. "Te saatte minuutin
valmistusaikaa -- ei sen enemp. Tn iltana lhden Indiaan ja sit
ennen minun tytyy tytt tehtvni. Yksi minuutti. Se riitt."

Dorianin kdet vaipuivat alas. Hervottomana kauhusta hn ei tiennyt mit
tehd. kki hurja toivo vlkhti hnen aivoissansa. "Seis!" hn
huudahti. "Pitkk aika on kulunut sisarenne kuolemasta? Pian,
vastatkaa!"

"Kahdeksantoista vuotta", vastasi mies. "Miksi sit kysytte? Mit vuodet
merkitsevt?"

"Kahdeksantoista vuotta", naureskeli Dorian Gray riemukkaalla nen
svyll. "Kahdeksantoista vuotta! Viek minut lyhdyn valoon ja katsokaa
minun kasvojani!"

James Vane epri hetken ymmrtmtt toisen tarkoitusta. Sitten hn
tarttui Dorian Grayhin ja laahasi hnet ulos holvikytvst.

Hmr, lekotteleva valo oli kyllin vahva osoittamaan James Vanelle
kauheaa erehdystn, joksi hn sit luuli, sill miehell, jota hn oli
yrittnyt tappaa oli nuorekkaan kukoistavat ja tahrattoman puhtaat
kasvot. Hn nytti olevan hiukan yli kahdenkymmenen vanha, melkein yht
vanha kuin hnen sisarensa oli ollut heidn erotessansa monta vuotta
sitten. Aivan varmaan tm mies ei ollut tuhonnut hnen elmns.

James Vane psti ktens irti ja hoiperteli taaksepin. "Hyv Jumala!
Hyv Jumala!" hn huudahti, "ja min kun olin murhata teidt!"

Dorian Gray veti syvlt henken. "Te olitte vhll tehd itsenne
syypksi hirven rikokseen", sanoi hn katsoen ankarasti mieheen.
"Olkoon tm teille varoituksena, ettette ota en kostoa omiin
ksiinne."

"Suokaa anteeksi, herra", mutisi James Vane. "Min erehdyin. Satunnainen
sana, jonka kuulin tuossa kirotussa kapakassa, johti minut vrille
jljille".

"Parasta ett menisitte kotiin ja panisitte pois tuon pistoolin, sill
muutoin voitte joutua ikvyyksiin", sanoi Dorian kntyen pois ja astuen
hitaasti katua pitkin.

James Vane ji katukytvlle seisomaan kauhun vallassa. Hn vapisi
kiireest kantaphn. Hetken kuluttua musta varjo, joka oli hiipinyt
pitkin kosteaa sein, astui valoon ja lhestyi hnt vijyvin askelin.
James Vane tunsi kden tarttuvan kiinni ksivarteensa ja katsoi
hmmstyen ymprilleen. Se oli toinen naisista, joka oli juonut
kapakassa.

"Miksi et tappanut hnt?" nainen shisi kohottaen kuihtuneet kasvonsa
aivan lhelle hnt. "Min huomasin ett hykksit hnen jlkeens
Dalysta. Hullupa olit! Olisit tappanut hnet. Hnell on paljon rahaa,
ja hn on viel pahaakin pahempi."

"Hn ei ollut se jota etsin", vastasi James, "enk min halua kenenkn
rahaa. Min etsin vain ern miehen henke. Se mies, jonka henke min
etsin, on nyt lhes neljnkymmenen vanha. Tm ei ollut juuri muuta kuin
poika. Jumalan kiitos, ettei hnen verens tahraa ksini."

Nainen nauroi katkerasti. "Vai ei muuta kuin poika!" hn virnisteli.
"Kuules, mies, siit on pian kahdeksantoista vuotta kun satuprinssi teki
minut siksi kuin mit nyt olen."

"Sin valehtelet!" huudahti James Vane.

Nainen nosti ktens taivasta kohti. "Jumalan nimess min puhun totta",
hn huudahti.

"Jumalan nimessk?"

"Ly minut kuuroksi, jos se ei ole totta. Hn on kaikista pahin tll
kvijist. Sanotaan ett hn on mynyt itsens pirulle kauniitten
kasvojen hinnasta. Lhes kahdeksantoista vuotta sitten tapasin hnet
ensi kertaa. Hn ei ole siit saakka muuttunut suuresti. Mutta min olen
kyll", hn lissi katsoen eptoivoissaan sivulle.

"Vannotko sen?"

"Vannon", kuului kuin kovaninen kaiku hnen ohuitten huuliensa
lomasta. "Mutta l anna minua ilmi", hn shisi; "min pelkn hnt.
Anna minulle hiukan rahaa ysijaa varten."

James Vane raastoi itsens kiroten hnest irti ja hykksi kadun
kulmaan, mutta Dorian Gray oli jo kadonnut. Kun hn katsoi taaksensa,
niin nainenkin oli hvinnyt.




LUKU XVII.


Viikkoa myhemmin Dorian Gray istui Selby Royalin kasvihuoneessa
jutellen kauniin herttuatar Monmouthin kanssa, joka, samoinkuin hnen
kuusikymmenvuotias, elhtnyt miehens, oli Dorianin vieraana. Oli juuri
teen aika, ja suuresta pytlampusta virtasi pitsivarjostimen lpi
himme valoa, valaisten hienoja kiinalaisia porsliinikuppeja ja
taiteellisesti taottua hopeaserviisi, joiden ress herttuatar
emnnitsi. Hnen valkeat ktens liikkuivat sulavasti kuppien
keskell, ja hnen tyteliset, punaiset huulensa hymyilivt sille, mit
Dorian oli kuiskannut hnen korvaansa. Lordi Henry loikoili
silkkipllyksisess korituolissa ja katseli heit. Persikan vrisell
sohvalla istui lady Narborough ja oli kuuntelevinansa herttuan
kertomusta viimeisest brasilialaisesta kovakuoriaisesta, jolla hn oli
rikastuttanut hynteiskokoelmaansa. Kolme nuorta miest hienoissa
iltapuvuissa tarjosi leivoksia naisille. Seuraan kuului kaksitoista
henke ja uusia vieraita odotettiin seuraavana pivn.

"Mit te kaksi juttelette?" sanoi lordi Henry astuen pydn
reen ja laskien kupin kdestn. "Dorian on kai kertonut minun
uudestikastamistuumastani, Gladys. Se on loistava ajatus."

"Mutta min en halua tulla uudestaan kastetuksi, Harry", vastasi
herttuatar katsoen hneen ihmeellisill silmilln. "Min olen aivan
tyytyvinen nimeeni, ja min luulen ett mr. Gray on myskin
tyytyvinen."

"Rakas Gladys, min en halua muuttaa kumpaistakaan mistn hinnasta.
Molemmat ovat tydellisi. Min ajattelin pasiallisesti kukkia. Eilen
min taitoin orkidean napinlpeni varten. Se oli ihana tpliks kukka,
yht kiihoittava kuin seitsemn kuolemansynti. Ajattelemattomana
hetken min kysyin puutarhurilta, mik sen nimi oli. Hn sanoi, ett se
oli hieno Robinsoniana-laji, tai jotakin muuta yht kauheaa. Surullinen
tosiasia on se, ett me emme en kykene antamaan esineille kauniita
nimi. Nimi on pasia. Min en koskaan vittele teoilla. Min vittelen
vain sanoilla. Siit syyst min vihaan alhaista realismia
kirjallisuudessa. Se mies, joka nimitt lapiota lapioksi, olisi
tuomittava itse kyttmn lapiota. Mihinkn muuhun hn ei kelpaa."

"Miten me sitten nimittisimme teit, Harry?" kysyi herttuatar.

"Hnen nimens on Paradoksiprinssi", sanoi Dorian.

"Se sopii hnelle mainiosti", huudahti herttuatar.

"Kiitos kunniasta", naureskeli lordi Henry vajoten tuoliin istumaan.
"Nimilipusta ei voi koskaan pst erilleen! Min en hyvksy sit
arvonime."

"Kuninkaallisista etuoikeuksista ei voi koskaan kieltyty", kuului
varoitus kauniilta huulilta.

"Te tahdotte siis ett puolustan valtaistuintani?"

"Kyll."

"Min lahjoitan teille huomispivn totuudet."

"Min tahdon mielemmin tmn pivn erehdykset", vastasi herttuatar.

"Riisttte aseet minun ksistni, Gladys", huudahti lordi Henry nopeasti
ksitten hnen tarkoituksensa.

"Min riistin vain teidn kilpenne, Harry, mutta en keihstnne."

"En rupea koskaan keihisille kauneuden kanssa", hn vastasi tehden
kauniin liikkeen kdellns.

"Siin te erehdytte, Harry, uskokaa minua. Te panette liian suurta arvoa
kauneuteen."

"Kuinka te voitte sit sanoa? Min mynnn, ett minun mielestni on
parempi olla kaunis kuin hyv. Mutta toisaalta ei kukaan ole
taipuvaisempi myntmn, ett on parempi olla hyv kuin ruma."

"Onko rumuus siis yksi seitsemst kuolemansynnist?" huudahti
herttuatar. "Miten ky silloin vertauksenne orkideasta?"

"Rumuus on yksi seitsemst kuolemanhyveist, Gladys. Teidn, hyvn
torypuolueen jsenen, ei pid arvostella niit liian alhaisiksi. Olut,
raamattu ja seitsemn kuolemanhyvett on tehnyt Englannistamme sen mik
se on."

"Ettek te siis rakasta maatanne?" kysyi herttuatar.

"Min eln siin."

"Jotta sit paremmin voisitte sit arvostella."

"Tahtoisitteko kuulla Europan tuomion siit?" kysyi lordi Henry.

"Mit he sanovat meist?"

"Ett Tartuffe on muuttanut Englantiin ja avannut tll liikkeen."

"Onko se teidn oma sukkeluutenne, Harry?"

"Min luovutan sen teille."

"Min en voi sit kytt. Se on liian tosi."

"Ei teidn tarvitse arkailla. Meidn maanmiehemme eivt koskaan tunne
itsen tuommoisessa kuvauksessa."

"He ovat kytnnllisi."

"He ovat enemmn viisaita kuin kytnnllisi. Kun he tekevt tili,
niin he asettavat vastatusten tyhmyyden ja rikkauden, paheet ja
teeskentelyn."

"Ja kuitenkin me olemme saaneet suuria aikaan."

"Meit on pakoitettu suuriin tekoihin, Gladys."

"Me olemme kantaneet niiden taakan."

"Ei sen pitemmlle kuin prssiin asti."

Herttuatar pudisti ptn. "Min uskon rotuun", hn sanoi.

"Se edustaa tarmokkaiden jlkelisi."

"Se kehittyy."

"Rappeutuminen huvittaa minua enemmn."

"Ents taide?" kysyi herttuatar.

"Se on tauti."

"Ja rakkaus?"

"Harhakuva."

"Uskonto?"

"Uskon uudenaikainen korvaus."

"Te olette skeptiko."

"En! Skeptillisyys on jo puolittain uskoa."

"Mit te sitten olette?"

"Selittminen on rajoittamista."

"Antakaa minulle johtolanka."

"Langat taittuvat. Te eksyisitte siihen labyrintiin."

"Te saatatte minut hmmentymn. Puhukaamme jostakin muusta."

"Meidn isntmme on erinomainen puheenaihe. Vuosia sitten hnt
sanottiin satuprinssiksi."

"Oi, l muistuta sit minulle", huudahti Dorian Gray.

"Isntmme on aivan hirve tn iltana", vastasi herttuatar punastuen.
"Min luulen ett hn olettaa Monmouthin naineen minut vain
tieteellisest harrastuksesta, sen vuoksi ett hn minussa nki parhaan
uudenaikaisen perhosen."

"Toivottavasti hn ei kuitenkaan lvist teit neuloilla, herttuatar",
naureskeli Dorian.

"Oi, kamarineitoni tekee sit aivan kylliksi, mr. Gray, kun hn on
suuttunut minuun."

"Ja mist syyst hn suuttuu teihin, herttuatar?"

"Aivan turhanpivisist syist, mr. Gray, sen vakuutan teille.
Tavallisesti sen vuoksi, ett tulen kotiin kymment vailla yhdeksn, ja
sanon hnelle, ett minun tytyy olla jo valmiiksi puettuna puoli
yhdekslt."

"Miten jrjetn hn on! Teidn pitisi nuhdella hnt."

"Sit min en uskalla, mr. Gray. Hn valmistaa kaikki minun hattuni.
Muistattehan sitkin, joka minulla oli lady Hilstonen puutarhakutsuissa?
Te ette muista, mutta te olette ystvllinen kun olette muistavinanne.
No niin, hn teki sen aivan tyhjst. Kaikki hyvt hatut ovat tehdyt
tyhjst."

"Samoinkuin hyv mainekin, Gladys", keskeytti lordi Henry. "Jokainen
vaikutus, jonka me toisiin teemme, tuottaa meille vihollisen. Voidakseen
saavuttaa yleist suosiota, tytyy olla kyvyltn keskinkertainen."

"Ei naisten joukossa", sanoi herttuatar ptn pudistaen; "ja naiset
hallitsevat maailmaa. Min vakuutan teille, me emme voi siet
keskinkertaisia ihmisi. Me naiset, niinkuin joku on sanonut, rakastamme
korvillamme, samoinkuin te miehet rakastatte silmillnne, jos te yleens
rakastatte."

"Nytt silt kuin me emme koskaan tekisi mitn", mutisi Dorian.

"No, silloin, mr. Gray, te ette myskn koskaan rakasta", vastasi
herttuatar teeskennellyll surulla.

"Rakas Gladys!" huudahti lordi Henry. "Kuinka voitte sit sanoa?
Romantiikka on alituista uudistumista, ja uudistuminen muuttaa himon
taiteeksi. Sit paitsi joka ainoa kerta, kun me rakastamme, on aina
ainoa kerta, jolloin olemme rakastaneet. Esineen muutos ei muuta himon
samuutta. Se enintn syvent tunnetta. Meill elmss voi enintn
olla yksi suuri kokemus, ja elmn koko salaisuus on siin, ett osaamme
uudistaa tuon kokemuksen niin monta kertaa kuin mahdollista."

"Vaikkapa olisi haavoittunutkin, Harry?" kysyi herttuatar hetken
kuluttua.

"Varsinkin silloin, jos on haavoittunut", vastasi lordi Henry.

Herttuatar kntyi ja katsahti Dorian Grayhin utelias ilme silmissn.
"Mit te siihen sanotte, mr. Gray?" hn kysyi.

Dorian epri hetken. Sitten hn heitti pns taaksepin ja naurahti.
"Min olen aina samaa mielt kuin Harrykin, herttuatar."

"Silloinko myskin kun hn on vrss?"

"Harry ei ole koskaan vrss, herttuatar."

"Ja tuottaako hnen filosofiansa teille onnea?"

"En ole koskaan etsinyt onnea. Kuka tarvitsee onnea? Min olen etsinyt
nautintoa."

"Ja oletteko sit lytnyt, mr. Gray?"

"Usein. Liiankin usein."

Herttuatar huokasi. "Min etsin rauhaa", hn sanoi, "ja jollen nyt mene
pukeutumaan, niin minulla ei ole sit tn iltana."

"Sallikaa minun antaa teille muutamia orkidejoja, herttuatar", huudahti
Dorian hypten pystyyn ja astuen kasvihuoneen perlle.

"Te keikailette liiaksi hnen kanssansa", sanoi lordi Henry serkulleen.
"Pitk varanne. Hn on hyvin lumoava."

"Jos hn ei olisi sit, niin ei olisi mitn taisteluakaan."

"Siis kreikkalainen kreikkalaista vastaan?"

"Min olen trojalaisten puolella. He taistelivat naisen thden."

"He tulivat voitetuiksi."

"On pahempaakin olemassa kuin tappiota", herttuatar vastasi.

"Te nelisttte hllin ohjin."

"Elm ky tasakynti", kuului vastaus.

"Sen min kirjoitan tn iltana pivkirjaani."

"Mink sitten?"

"Ett krventynyt lapsi ei karta tulta."

"Min en ole edes krventynyt. Minun siipeni ovat koskemattomat."

"Te kyttte niit kaikkeen muuhun paitsi lentoon."

"Rohkeus on miehist paennut naisiin. Se on uusi kokemus."

"Teill on kilpailija."

"Kuka?"

Lordi Henry nauroi. "Lady Narborough", hn kuiskasi. "Hn suorastaan
jumaloi Doriania."

"Te peloitatte minua. Rakkaus muinaisuuteen on vaarallinen meille
romantikoille."

"Romantikoille! Te osaatte kytt kaikkia tieteen jrjestelmi."

"Miehet ovat kasvattaneet meit."

"Mutta he eivt ole psseet teist selville."

"Antakaa kuvaus meist sukupuolena", kuului vaatimus herttuattaren
puolelta.

"Sfinksej ilman salaisuuksia."

Herttuatar katsoi hymyillen lordi Henryyn. "Kuinka kauan mr. Gray
viipyy!" hn sanoi. "Mennn hnt auttamaan. Enhn ole edes sanonut
hnelle mink vrinen minun pukuni on."

"Ah! te saatte valita puvun hnen kukkiensa mukaan, Gladys."

"Se olisi ennenaikuista antautumista."

"Romantinen taide alkaa kohopisteelln."

"Minun tytyy silytt tilaisuus perytymiseenkin."

"Parthialaiseen tapaanko?"

"He lysivt ermaassa turvapaikan. Sit min en voisi tehd."

"Naiset eivt aina saa vapaasti valita", lordi Henry vastasi, mutta
tuskin hn oli sen lauseen lopettanut, kun kasvihuoneen perlt kuului
tukahdettua valitusta ja kumeaa nt, iknkuin joku olisi kaatunut.
Kaikki kavahtivat pystyyn. Herttuatar seisoi liikkumattomana kauhusta.
Ja tuskan ilme kasvoissaan lordi Henry hykksi huojuvien palmujen
lomitse ja lysi Dorian Grayn makaamasta kivilattialla tajuttomana kuin
kuollut.

Hn kannettiin heti siniseen vierashuoneesen ja laskettiin sohvalle
pitkkseen. Hetken kuluttua hn tointui ja katsoi hmmstyneen
ymprilleen.

"Mit on tapahtunut?" hn kysyi. "Oi, nyt muistan. Olenko turvassa
tll, Harry?" Hn alkoi vapista.

"Rakas Dorian", vastasi lordi Henry. "Sin menit vain tainnoksiin. Siin
kaikki. Varmaan olet liiaksi rasittanut itsesi. Sinun ei pitisi tulla
alas pivllisille. Min hoidan sinun isntvelvollisuuksiasi."

"Ei, min tulen alas", hn sanoi nousten pystyyn. "Min tulen mielemmin
toisten luo. En tahdo olla yksin."

Hn meni huoneesensa ja pukeutui. Hn oli hurjan iloinen pydss, mutta
silloin-tllin hn vrisi kauhusta muistellessansa ett hn oli nhnyt
kasvihuoneen ikkunaa vasten puristuneena, aivan kuin valkean nenliinan,
James Vanen kasvot, jotka thystelivt hneen.




LUKU XVIII.


Seuraavana pivn hn ei poistunut talosta, ja viettip viel suurimman
osan piv omassa huoneessansakin kuolemanpelosta sairaana ja samalla
vlinpitmttmn koko elmlle. Hn tunsi, ett hnt ajettiin takaa,
urkittiin ja koetettiin kietoa paulaan. Hn sikhti joka kerta, kun
ikkunaverhokin liehui tuulessa. Kellastuneet lehdet, joita tuuli ajoi
vasten lyijykehyksisi ikkunaruutuja, kuvasivat hnen mielestns hnen
omia rauenneita ptksins ja hurjaa katumustansa. Kun hn sulki
silmns, niin hn nki merimiehen kasvot tirkistvn sisn sumuisen
ruudun lpi, ja taaskin hnen sydmens puristui kauhusta kokoon.

Mutta ehkp hnen mielikuvituksensa vain oli yn helmasta loihtinut
esiin koston ja nyttnyt hnelle rangaistuksen julmia haamuja. Elv
elm oli kaaosta, mutta mielikuvituksen loogillisuudessa oli jotakin
hirve. Mielikuvitus se usutti katumuksen synnin kintereille.
Mielikuvitus oli syyn siihen, ett rikos synnytti muodottomia
sikiitn. Elvss elmss ei pahetta rangaistu eik hyve saanut
palkintoa. Voimakas menestyi, heikko sortui. Siin kaikki. Sit paitsi
jos joku vieras olisi kierrellyt taloa, niin palvelijat tai vahdit
olisivat nhneet hnet. Jos jlki olisi huomattu kukkapenkereiss, niin
puutarhuri olisi sen ilmoittanut. Niin, se oli ollut vain
mielikuvitusta. Sibyl Vanen veli ei ollut palannut hnt murhaamaan. Hn
oli purjehtinut laivallaan hukkuakseen jonakuna yn talvimyrskyyn. Joka
tapauksessa hnest hn saattoi olla turvassa. Eihn mies tuntenut edes
hnt, ei voinut tiet kuka hn oli. Nuoruuden naamari oli pelastanut
hnet.

Ja sittenkin, jos se olikin ollut vain mielikuvitusta, niin kuinka
kauheaa oli ajatella, ett omatunto saattoi loihtia esiin noin julmia
harhakuvia, antaa niille elvn muodon ja liikkumiskyvyn! Millaiseksi
hnen elmns muuttuisi, jos hnen rikoksensa varjot yt pivt
thystelisivt hnt pimeist nurkista, pilkkaisivat hnt salaisista
piilopaikoista, kuiskaisivat hnen korvaansa, kun hn istuisi
juhlapydss, herttisi hnet jkylmill sormillaan unen helmasta!
Kun tuo ajatus hiipi hnen aivoihinsa, niin hn kalpeni kauhusta ja ilma
tuntui hnest kki kylmenneen. Oi, min hurjana mielettmyyden hetken
hn olikaan tappanut ystvns! Miten kauhea yksin tuon tapauksen
muistokin oli! Hn nki sen jlleen elvn edessn. Joka ainoa julma
yksityiskohta kohosi hnen eteens entistn kauheampana. Ajan mustasta
onkalosta nousi hnen syntins haamu veripunaisiin hikiliinoihin
kiedottuna. Kun lordi Henry tuli hnen luoksensa kuuden tienoissa, niin
hn nki hnen itkevn iknkuin sydn olisi ollut pakahtua.

Vasta kolmantena pivn hn uskalsi menn ulos. Tuon talvisen aamun
kirkkaassa, pihkalta tuoksuvassa ilmassa oli jotakin, joka nytti
palauttavan takaisin hnen iloisuutensa ja elmnhalunsa. Mutta ei yksin
ulkonainen ymprist ollut syyn thn muutokseen. Hnen oma luontonsa
oli noussut vastustamaan sit ylenmrist tuskaa, joka yritti
hajoittaa ja heikent hnen sopusointuista mielenrauhaansa. Siten ky
aina hienostuneitten ja liian tunteellisten temperamenttien. Niiden
voimakkaat intohimot joko murtuvat tai taipuvat. Ne joko tappavat
miehen, tai kuolevat itse. Pintapuoliset surut ja pintapuoliset
rakkaudet kestvt loppumattomasti. Mutta suuret rakkaudet ja suuret
surut hukkuvat omaan kyllyyteens. Sitpaitsi Dorian oli varmasti
vakuutettu siit, ett hn oli ollut oman sikkyneen mielikuvituksensa
uhri, ja hn muisteli nyt pelkoansa jonkunmoisella slill eik
niinkn vhisell halveksumisella.

Aamiaisen jlkeen hn kveli herttuattaren kanssa puutarhassa ja ajoi
sitten puiston kautta metsstysseuran luo. Hrm nytti iknkuin
suolalta ruohonkorsissa. Taivas kaareutui kuin ylsalaisin knnetty
metallikupu. Hieno jkalvo reunusti kaislikkojrve.

Havumetsn reunassa hn huomasi sir Geoffrey Cloustonin, herttuattaren
veljen, joka juuri otti kaksi tyhj patroonaa pyssystn. Dorian
hyppsi alas vaunuistaan ja kskettyn palvelijansa vied hevosen
kotiin hn tunkeutui pensaikon ja kuihtuneiden sananjalkojen lpi
vieraansa luo.

"Onko ollut hyv onni, Geoffrey?" hn kysyi.

"Ei sanottavasti, Dorian. Enimmt linnut nyttvt paenneen lakeuksille.
Toivottavasti ky paremmin lunchin jlkeen, jolloin lhdemme toiselle
maalle."

Dorian kulki hnen rinnallansa. Kylm, tuoksuva ilma, metsn
ruskean-punaiset vrivivahdukset, ajajien khet net, jotka
silloin-tllin kajahtelivat ilmassa, pyssyjen kova pauke viehttivt
hnt ja tyttivt hnen mielens suloisella rauhan tunteella. Onnen
huolettomuus, ilon ylev rauha valtasi hnet.

kki hyppsi mttlt, parin metrin pst heist, pystykorvainen
jnis pitkill, norjilla jaloillaan eteenpin. Se hykksi suoraan
lepikk kohti. Sir Geoffrey kohotti pyssyns olalleen, mutta elukan
suloisissa liikkeiss oli jotain, joka viehtti Dorian Grayt siihen
mrn, ett hn huudahti kki: "l ammu sit, Geoffrey. Anna sen
el."

"Mit hulluja, Dorian!" naureskeli hnen toverinsa, ja kun jnis hyppsi
lepikkn, niin hn ampui. Kuului kaksi huutoa, jniksen tuskan huuto,
joka on aivan hirve, sek henkitoreissaan olevan ihmisen valitusta,
mik on vielkin hirvemp.

"Hyv Jumala! Min ammuin ajomiehen!" huudahti sir Geoffrey. "Aika aasi,
kun asettuu pyssyjen tielle! lk ampuko!" hn huusi voimiensa takaa.
"Mies on haavoittunut."

P-ajaja tuli juosten keppi kdess.

"Miss, herra? Miss hn on?" hn huusi. Samassa ampuminen lakkasi koko
linjalla.

"Tll", vastasi sir Geoffrey vihoissaan, rienten lepikkn. "Miksi
ihmeess te ette pid huolta miehistnne? Olette pilanneet
metsstyshuvini tlt pivlt kokonaan."

Dorian seurasi heit katseillaan kun he tunkeutuivat lepikkoon
taivuttaen notkeat, heiluvat oksat tielt. Hetken kuluttua he tulivat
taas esiin laahaten ruumiin auringonvaloon. Hn kntyi pois kauhun
vallassa. Onnettomuus nytti seuraavan hnt minne ikn hn kulki. Hn
kuuli sir Geoffreyn kysyvn oliko mies aivan kuollut ja ajajan mytvn
vastauksen. Metsss hnen mielestn alkoi kki nky kasvoja joka
puolelta. Kuului lukemattomien askelten kopinaa ja nien hiljaista
suhinaa. Suuri vaskirintainen fasaani pyrhti oksien ylpuolella.

Muutamien minuuttien kuluttua, jotka hnest kiihkess mielentilassaan
tuntuivat loppumattoman pitkilt ja tuskallisilta, hn tunsi kden
olkaplln. Hn stkhti ja katseli ymprilleen.

"Dorian", sanoi lordi Henry, "ehk on parasta ett ksken heidn
keskeyttmn metsstyksen tlt pivlt. Ei nyt hyvlt, jos me
jatkamme."

"Min toivoisin ett se loppuisi ikipiviksi, Harry", hn vastasi
katkerasti. "Koko juttu on hirve ja julma. Onko mies...?"

Hn ei voinut lopettaa lausettansa.

"Pelknp kyll", vastasi lordi Henry. "Hn sai koko latingin
rintaansa. Hn kuoli varmaan aivan heti. Tule; mennn kotiin."

He kvelivt rinnatusten lehtikujan suuntaa kohti lhes viisikymment
metri sanomatta sanaakaan. Sitten Dorian katsahti lordi Henryyn ja
sanoi syvsti huoaten: "Se on paha enne, Harry, hyvin paha enne."

"Mik?" kysyi lordi Henry. "Ah, tuo tapaturmako? Rakas ystv, ei sit
voi auttaa. Se oli miehen oma syy. Miksi hn asettui aivan pyssyn eteen?
Sit paitsi mit se meille merkitsee. Geoffreylle se on ikv juttu,
tietenkin. Eihn ajajia sovi ampua. Muuten ihmiset vittvt ett on
huono ampuja. Ja sit ei Geoffrey ole; hn ampuu erittin hyvin. Mutta
ei siit maksa vaivaa puhua."

Dorian pudisti ptn. "Se on paha enne, Harry. Min aavistan ett
jotakin kauheaa tapahtuu jollekin meist. Ehk minulle itselleni", hn
lissi, sivellen kdelln silmin tuskallisella liikkeell.

Vanhempi mies naurahti. "Ei mikn muu ole kauheaa maailmassa paitsi
ikv, Dorian. Se on ainoa synti, jolla ei ole anteeksi antoa. Mutta ei
ole pelkoa, ett meidn tarvitsisi sit kest, jolleivt nuoret ala
puhua tst tapauksesta pivllispydss. Min sanon heille ett se on
kielletty puheenaine. Mit enteihin tulee, niin sellaisia ei ole
olemassa. Kohtalo ei lhet meille sanansaattajia. Se on siksi liian
viisas tai liian julma. Sit paitsi, mit ihmett sinulle voisi
tapahtua, Dorian? Sinulla on kaikki mit ihminen maailmassa voi tarvita.
Ei ole ketn, joka ei mielihyvll vaihtaisi paikkaa sinun kanssasi."

"Ei ole ketn, jonka kanssa min en haluaisi vaihtaa paikkaa, Harry.
l naura tuolla tavalla. Min puhun tytt totta. Talonpoika parka,
joka juuri sken kuoli, on onnellisempi kuin min. Min en pelk itse
kuolemaa. Min pelkn vain sen lheisyytt. Sen jttilissiivet
nyttvt suhahtelevan ymprillni lyijynraskaassa ilmassa. Hyv Jumala,
etk ne miehen liikkuvan noiden puiden takana ja tarkastavan ja
odottavan minua?"

Lordi Henry katsoi siihen suuntaan, jonne hn osoitti vapisevalla,
hansikoitulla kdelln. "Niin", hn sanoi, "min nen puutarhurin, joka
odottaa sinua. Luullakseni hn tahtoo kysy sinulta mit kukkia tahdot
tn iltana pytn. Kuinka hirven hermostunut sin olet, poika parka!
Sinun tytyy neuvotella minun lkrini kanssa, kun palaamme takaisin
kaupunkiin."

Dorian psti huojennuksen huokauksen kun hn nki puutarhurin
lhestyvn. Mies kosketti hattuansa, vilkaisi lordi Henryyn epriden ja
otti sitten esille kirjeen, jonka hn ojensi isnnlleen. "Hnen armonsa
pyysi minua odottamaan vastausta", hn mutisi.

Dorian pisti kirjeen taskuunsa. "Sanokaa hnen armollensa ett tulen
sisn", hn sanoi kylmsti. Mies kntyi pois ja astui nopeasti taloa
kohti.

"Kuinka mielelln naiset tekevt vaarallisia tekoja", naureskeli lordi
Henry. "Se on yksi niit ominaisuuksia, joita ihailen heiss enimmin.
Nainen haluaa keikailla kenen kanssa hyvns niinkauan kuin maailma
hnt katselee."

"Kuinka mielellsi sin puhut vaarallisia asioita, Harry! Mutta tss
suhteessa sin kokonaan erehdyt. Min pidn herttuattaresta hyvin
paljon, mutta min en rakasta hnt."

"Ja herttuatar rakastaa sinua hyvin paljon, mutta ei pid sinusta yht
paljon, jotta te sovitte mainiosti yhteen."

"Sin puhut hvyttmyyksi, Harry, eik hvistysjutuissa ole koskaan
per."

"Jokaisen hvistysjutun perustuksena on epmoraalinen varmuus", sanoi
lordi Henry sytytten paperossin.

"Sin olisit valmis uhraamaan kenen hyvns, Harry, epigrammin vuoksi."

"Maailma saapuu kutsumatta alttarin reen", kuului vastaus.

"Min toivoisin voivani rakastaa", huudahti Dorian Gray syvll
nenpaatoksella. "Mutta minusta tuntuu kuin olisin kadottanut kaiken
intohimon, unohtanut kaikki halut. Min panen liiaksi huomiota omaan
itseeni. Minun oma personallisuuteni on tullut taakaksi minulle
itselleni. Min tahtoisin paeta, lhte pois, unohtaa. Min olin typer
kun tulin tnne lainkaan. Parasta jos shkitn Harveylle ja ksken
panemaan jahdin kuntoon. Veneess ainakin on turvassa."

"Turvassa mist, Dorian? Sinulla on varmaan jokin huoli. Miksi et sano
minulle mit se on? Tiedthn ett auttaisin sinua."

"En voi sanoa sit sinulle, Harry", hn vastasi surullisesti. "Ja se on
vain mielikuvitusta, sen voin sinulle vakuuttaa. Tm onneton tapaus on
kiihoittanut minua. Min aavistan ett jotakin samantapaista tapahtuu
minullekin."

"Mit hullutusta!"

"Toivottavasti se on vain hullutusta, mutta min en mahda mitn tuolle
tunteelle. Ah! tsshn on herttuatar, aivan kuin Diana muodikkaassa
puvussa. Me olemme tulleet jo takaisin, niinkuin nette, herttuatar."

"Min olen kuullut kaikki, mr. Gray", hn vastasi. "Geoffrey parka on
aivan suunniltansa. Ja te taisitte pyyt ettei hn ampuisi jnist.
Miten ihmeellisi!"

"Niin, se oli todellakin hyvin kummallista. En tied itsekn miksi sen
tein. Se oli kai vain oikku. Se oli niin ihmeen suloinen pieni elukka.
Mutta min olen pahoillani, ett teille on kerrottu tuosta miehest. Se
on hirve puheenaihe."

"Se on ikv puheenaihe", keskeytti lordi Henry. "Sill ei ole mitn
psykologista arvoa. Ajatelkaahan, jos Geoffrey olisi tehnyt sen
tahallaan, miten mieltkiinnittv hn olisi! Minp tahtoisin tuntea
jonkun, joka on tehnyt oikean murhan."

"Kuinka kauhea te olette, Harry!" huudahti herttuatar. "Eik totta, mr.
Gray? Harry, mr. Gray on jlleen pahoinvointinen. Hn on vhll menn
tainnoksiin."

Dorian ponnisti kaikki voimansa ja hymyili. "Ei se merkitse mitn,
herttuatar", hn mutisi; "minun hermoni ovat kokonaan pilalla. Siin
kaikki. Kvelin varmaan liian kauaksi tn aamuna. Min en kuullut mit
Harry sanoi. Oliko se hyvin ilke? Kertokaa se minulle toisella kertaa.
Minun tytyy heittyty hiukan pitkkseni. Suottehan minulle anteeksi,
eik totta?"

He olivat saapuneet levelle porraskytvlle, joka johti kasvihuoneesta
penkereelle. Kun lasiovi sulkeutui Dorianin jlkeen, niin lordi Henry
kntyi ja katseli herttuatarta uneksivilla silmilln. "Oletteko te
hyvin rakastunut hneen?" hn kysyi.

Herttuatar ei kohta vastannut, vaan katseli maisemaa ymprilln. "Min
tahtoisin tiet sit itsekin", hn sanoi vihdoin.

Lordi Henry pudisti ptn. "Varmuus tuottaa onnettomuutta. Epvarmuus
meit viehtt. Sumussa esineet muuttuvat ihmeellisiksi."

"Mutta voi eksy mys oikealta tielt."

"Kaikki tiet pttyvt samaan kohtaan, rakas Gladys."

"Ja mik se on?"

"Pettymys."

"Se oli minun debyytini elmss", hn huokasi.

"Se tuotti teille herttuan kruunun."

"Min olen kyllstynyt mansikanlehtiin."

"Ne sopivat teille."

"Vain julkisuudessa."

"Te kaipaisitte niit", sanoi lordi Henry.

"Min en tahdo luopua terlehdest."

"Monmouthilla on korvat."

"Vanhat kuulevat huonosti."

"Onko hn koskaan ollut mustasukkainen?"

"Jospa hn edes olisi ollut sit."

Lordi Henry katseli ymprilleen iknkuin etsien jotakin.

"Mit te etsitte?" kysyi herttuatar.

"Teidn florettinne pontta", hn vastasi. "Te olette -- kadottanut sen."

Herttuatar nauroi. "Minulla on viel naamarini tallessa."

"Se kohottaa teidn silmienne suloutta", vastasi lordi Henry.

Herttuatar nauroi jlleen. Hnen hampaansa olivat kuin valkoiset
siemenet punaisessa hedelmss.

Ylhll huoneessaan Dorian Gray makasi sohvallaan ja jokainen hermo
hnen ruumiissaan vrisi kauhusta. Elm oli kki tullut liian
raskaaksi taakaksi hnen kantaa. Onneton ajaja, joka oli kuollut niin
hirven kuoleman, tullut ammutuksi metsikss kuin villielin, oli
iknkuin hnen oman kuolemansa enne. Hn oli vhll ollut menn
tainnoksiin, kun lordi Henry sattumalta oli tuonut ilmi leikillisen,
kyynillisen phnpistonsa.

Kello viisi hn soitti palvelijaa ja kski hnen panna kokoon tavarat
kaupunkiin menev yjunaa varten ja toimittaa vaunut oven eteen puoli
yhdeksksi. Hn oli pttnyt, ettei hn nukkuisi toista yt en Selby
Royalissa. Se oli pahaenteinen paikka. Kuolema vijyi siell keskell
valoisaa piv. Ruoho metssskin oli verentahraamaa.

Sitten hn kirjoitti pari rivi lordi Henrylle, sanoen menevns
kaupunkiin lkrin puheille ja pyyten hnt huvittamaan vieraita hnen
poissaollessansa. Kun hn pani kirjeen kuoreen, niin ovelta kuului
kolkutus ja palvelija ilmoitti ett pajaja tahtoi puhutella hnt.
Dorian rypisti kulmakarvojaan ja puri huultaan. "Tulkoon sisn", hn
mutisi hetken eprityns.

Niin pian kuin mies astui sisn, Dorian veti shekkikirjansa esiin
laatikosta ja avasi sen.

"Te tulette kai tmnaamuisen onnettomuuden johdosta, Thornton?" hn
sanoi ottaen kynn kteens.

"Niin, herra", vastasi metsstj.

"Oliko tuo mies raukka naimisissa? Onko hnell perhett?" kysyi Dorian
kiusaantuneen nkisen. "Jos niin on, niin en tahdo ett he krsisivt
puutetta, ja olen sen vuoksi halukas antamaan heille niin paljon rahaa,
kuin te arvelette heidn tarvitsevan."

"Me emme tunne miest, herra. Sen vuoksi uskalsinkin tulla teidn
puheillenne."

"Ettek te tunne hnt?" sanoi Dorian vlinpitmttmsti. "Mit te
tarkoitatte? Eik hn ollut teidn miehinne?"

"Ei, herra. En ole koskaan ennen nhnyt hnt. Hn on luultavasti
merimies, herra."

Kyn putosi Dorian Grayn kdest ja tuntui iknkuin sydn kki olisi
lakannut tykyttmst. "Merimiesk?" hn huudahti. "Sanotteko merimies?"

"Niin, herra. Hn nytt aivan merimiehelt; molemmat ksivarret ovat
tatueeratut ja muuta sellaista."

"Eik ole lydetty mitn hnen yltns?" sanoi Dorian kumartuen
eteenpin ja katsellen miest silmt sellln. "Jotakin josta voisi
saada selkoa hnen nimestns?"

"Hiukan rahaa, herra -- ei paljon, ja kuusilaukauksisen revolverin.
Nime ei ollut missn. Hn nytti kunnon miehelt, vaikka hiukan
rnstyneelt. Me luulemme, ett hn oli merimies."

Dorian hyphti pystyyn. Mieletn toivo valtasi hnet. Hn tarttui siihen
kiihkesti kiinni. "Miss on miehen ruumis?" hn huudahti. "Pian! Min
tahdon sen heti nhd."

"Se on tyhjss tallissa Home Farmissa, herra. Vki ei halua pit
sellaista huoneissansa. He sanovat ett ruumis tuo onnettomuutta
mukanansa."

"Home Farmissa! Lhtek sinne heti ja odottakaa siell minua. Sanokaa
tallirengille ett hn tuo heti hevoseni. Ei. Ei tarvitse. Min menen
talliin itse. Siten voitan aikaa."

Vhemmn kuin neljnnestunnin kuluttua Dorian Gray ajaa nelisti pitkin
lehtikujaa niin nopeasti kuin hevonen saattoi juosta. Puut suhahtivat
hnen ohitsensa iknkuin peikkojen saatto, ja kauhistuttavat varjot
laskeutuivat hnen tiellens. Hevonen pillastui kki nhdessn valkean
portinpylvn ja oli heitt Dorianin maahan. Hn limhytti sit
piiskallansa. Elin kiiti pimen ilman lpi kuin nuoli. Kivet
kimpoilivat sen jaloissa.

Vihdoin hn saapui Home Farmiin. Kaksi miest vihelteli pihalla. Hn
hyppsi alas satulasta ja heitti ohjakset toiselle. Perimisest
tallista loisti tulta. Hn arvasi ruumiin olevan siell ja kiiruhti
ovelle, tarttuen lukkoon.

Siihen hn pyshtyi hetkeksi. Hn tunsi ratkaisun hetken olevan lhell,
joko hnen onnekseen tai onnettomuudekseen. Sitten hn raastoi oven auki
ja astui sisn.

Skkiljll huoneen perll makasi kuolleen miehen ruumis karheassa
paidassa ja sinisiss housuissa. Likainen nenliina peitti kasvoja.
Paksu kynttil pullon suussa lekotteli ruumiin vieress.

Dorian Grayt vrisytti. Hnen oli aivan mahdoton nostaa nenliinaa ja
hn kutsui rengin luokseen.

"Ottakaa tuo riepu kasvoilta pois. Min tahdon nhd hnt", hn sanoi,
tarttuen kiinni ovenpieleen.

Kun renki oli sen tehnyt, niin Dorian astui lhemmksi. Ilon huudahdus
psi hnen huuliltansa. Mies, joka metsss oli ammuttu, oli James
Vane.

Hn seisoi jonkun aikaa ja katseli kuollutta ruumista. Kun hn ratsasti
kotiin, niin hnen silmns olivat kyyneliss, sill hn tiesi olevansa
nyt turvattu.




LUKU XIX.


"Ei sinun kannata vakuuttaa minulle, ett aiot tulla hyvksi", huudahti
lordi Henry, kastaen valkoiset sormensa punaiseen kuparikulhoon, jossa
oli ruusuvett. "Sin olet erinomainen. l huoli muuttaa itsesi."

Dorian Gray pudisti ptns. "Ei, Harry, min olen tehnyt liian paljo
julmaa elissni. Nyt siit saa tulla loppu. Eilen min aloitin hyvt
tyni."

"Miss sin olit eilen?"

"Maalla, Harry. Min olin yksin pieness ravintolassa."

"Rakas ystv", sanoi lordi Henry hymyillen, "jokainen voi olla hyv
maalla. Siell ei ole kiusauksia. Siin syy, miksi ihmiset, jotka eivt
asu kaupungissa, ovat niin sivistymttmi. Sivistyst ei niinkn
helposti voi saavuttaa. On vain kaksi tiet, jotka sinne johtavat:
toinen on kultuurin, toinen turmeluksen tie. Maalaisilla ei ole
tilaisuutta kumpaiseenkaan, siksi he tylsistyvt."

"Kultuuri ja turmelus", toisti Dorian. "Minulla on hiukan kokemusta
kumpaisestakin. Minusta tuntuu nyt hirvelt, ett ne molemmat kulkevat
aina rinnatusten. Sill min olen lytnyt uuden ihanteen, Harry. Min
aion muuttua. Min olen jo muuttunut."

"Sin et viel ole sanonut minulle, mik sinun hyv tekosi oli. Vai
sanoitko tehneesi jo enemmnkin kuin yhden?" kysyi hnen toverinsa
rakentaessaan lautaselleen pienen, punaisen pyramiidin mansikoista ja
sirotellessaan simpukan muotoisella sokerikauhalla valkeaa sokeria
niiden plle.

"Min sanon sen sinulle, Harry. En voisi siit kellekn muulle puhua.
Min olen sstnyt ern. Se kuuluu hyvin itserakkaalta, mutta sin
ymmrrt mit min tarkoitan. Hn oli ihastuttava, ja ihmeellisesti
Sibyl Vanen muotoinen. Se luullakseni ensin veti minut hnen puoleensa.
Muistathan Sibylia, eik totta? Kuinka pitk aika siit jo on! No niin,
Hetty ei tietysti kuulu meidn styymme. Hn on yksinkertainen
maalaistytt. Mutta min rakastin hnt todellakin. Olen aivan varma
siit, ett rakastin hnt. Kuluneena toukokuuna, joka on ollut niin
ihmeen ihana, min tavallisesti kvin hnt tapaamassa kahdesti tai
kolmasti viikossa. Eilen hn kohtasi minut pieness hedelmtarhassa.
Omenakukat satelivat hnen hiuksiinsa ja hn nauroi. Me aioimme
matkustaa yhdess pois tn aamuna. Mutta kki min ptin jtt hnet
yht kukoistavan puhtaana kuin olin hnet lytnytkin."

"Voin arvata, ett tuon tunteen uutuus tuotti sinulle todellista
nautintoa, Dorian", keskeytti lordi Henry. "Mutta min voin kertoa
sinulle, miten sinun idyllisi loppuu. Sin olet antanut tytlle hyvn
neuvon ja murtanut hnen sydmens. Siin on sinun parannuksesi alku."

"Harry, sin olet julma! l puhu tuollaisia kauheuksia. Hettyn sydn ei
ole srkynyt. Tietysti hn itki ja niin edespin. Mutta hn ei ole
hvisty. Hn voi el samoinkuin Perditakin puutarhassaan minttujen ja
kehkukkien keskell."

"Ja surra uskotonta Florizeli!" sanoi lordi Henry nauraen nojautuessaan
tuolin selk vasten. "Rakas Dorian, sinulla vasta on ihmeellisi,
poikamaisia oikkuja. Luuletko ett tuo tytt tmn jlkeen tyytyy
kehenkn oman styns mieheen? Varmaankin hn joutuu naimisiin jonkun
raa'an ajurin tai jrn talonpojan kanssa. No niin, se tosiasia, ett
hn on tavannut sinut ja rakastanut sinua, saattaa hnet inhoamaan
miestn ja hn tulee onnettomaksi. Moraaliselta kannalta katsoen en voi
panna kovin suurta arvoa sinun kieltytymiseesi. Ensimiseksi aluksikin
se on varsin heikko. Mist sit paitsi tiedt ettei Hetty tll hetkell
kellu jollakin thtien valaisemalla myllylammikolla, kauniitten
ulpukkojen ymprimn, aivan kuin Ofelia?"

"Tt min en voi kest, Harry! Sin pilkkaat kaikkea ja keksit mit
hirveimpi murhenytelmi. Olen pahoillani, ett puhuinkaan sinulle koko
asiasta. En vlit siit, mit minulle sanot. Min tiedn tehneeni
oikein. Hetty parka! Kun tn aamuna ratsastin talon ohi, niin nin
hnen kalpeat kasvonsa ikkunassa, aivan kuin jasmiinikimpun. lkmme
puhuko siit sen enemp, lk koeta vakuuttaa minulle, ett ensiminen
hyv ty, jonka vuosikausiin olen suorittanut, ensiminen pienen pieni
uhraus, jonka olen tehnyt, on synti sekin. Min tahdon tulla
paremmaksi. Ja min tulen paremmaksi. Kerro jotakin itsestsi. Mit
kaupungissa tapahtuu? En ole moneen pivn kynyt klubissa."

"Ihmiset keskustelevat yh Basil raukan katoamisesta."

"Min luulin, ett he jo olisivat kyllstyneet siihen", sanoi Dorian
kaataen hiukan viini lasiinsa ja rypisten kulmakarvojaan.

"Rakas ystv, he ovat puhuneet siit vain kuusi viikkoa ja
englantilainen yleis ei sied kuin yhden keskusteluaiheen joka kolmas
kuukausi. Viime aikoina heill kuitenkin on ollut varsin hyv onni.
Heill on ollut minun avioeroni ja Alan Campbellin itsemurha. Nyt he
ovat viel lisksi saaneet taiteilijan salaperisen katoamisen.
Salapoliisi yh vakuuttaa, ett mies, joka lksi marraskuun yhdeksnten
pivn yjunalla Parisiin harmaassa ulsteritakissa, oli Basil parka, ja
ranskalainen poliisi vitt, ettei Basil koskaan ole saapunut Parisiin.
Kahden viikon kuluttua saamme kai kuulla, ett hnet on nhty San
Franciscossa. Se on kumma juttu, mutta kaikki kadonneet ilmestyvt San
Franciscoon. Se on varmaan ihana kaupunki, ja siell lienee kaikki
tulevan maailman viehtykset."

"Mit sin luulet Basilille tapahtuneen?" kysyi Dorian kohottaen
punaviinin tulta vasten ja ihmetellen, miten hn saattoi puhua tst
asiasta niin levollisesti.

"Ei minulla ole vhintkn aavistusta. Jos Basil tahtoo pysy piilossa,
niin mit se minua liikuttaa. Jos hn on kuollut, niin en tahdo ajatella
hnt. Ei mikn muu kuin kuolema ole koskaan peloittanut minua. Min
vihaan sit."

"Mink vuoksi?" sanoi nuorempi mies vsyneesti.

"Senthden", sanoi lordi Henry kohottaen kullatun hajurasian nenns,
"ett nykyjn jo voi kest elmss kaikkea muuta paitsi sit. Kuolema
ja raakamaisuus ovat ainoat tosiasiat yhdeksnnelltoista vuosisadalla,
joita ei ky kieltminen. Juodaan kahvia musiikkisalissa, Dorian. Soita
minulle Chopinia. Se mies, jonka kanssa minun vaimoni karkasi, soitti
mainiosti Chopinia. Viktoria parka! Min pidin hnest hyvin paljon.
Talo tuntuu nyt varsin tyhjlt ilman hnt. Tietysti naiminen on vain
tapa, varsin huonokin tapa. Mutta ihminen suree pahimpienkin tapojensa
kadottamista. Ehkp juuri niit sureekin kaikkein enimmin. Ne
muodostavat niin suuren osan ihmisen personallisuutta."

Dorian ei sanonut mitn, vaan nousi pydn rest ja astuen toiseen
huoneesen hn kvi pianon reen istumaan ja antoi sormiensa kulkea
valkoisten ja mustien norsunluisien koskettimien yli. Kun kahvi tuotiin
sisn, niin hn lakkasi soittamasta ja sanoi katsellen lordi Henryyn:
"Etk koskaan ole tullut ajatelleeksi, ett Basil olisi murhattu?"

Lordi Henry haukotteli. "Basil oli hyvin suosittu, ja hn kytti aina
halpaa kelloa. Miksik hnet olisi murhattu? Hn ei ollut kylliksi
viisas, jotta hnell olisi ollut vihamiehi. Tietysti hn maalarina oli
ihmeen nerokas. Mutta mies voi maalata kuin Velasquez ja kuitenkin olla
typer. Kerran vain hn hertti minun mielenkiintoani, ja se oli silloin
kun hn vuosia sitten puhui hurjasta ihastuksestaan sinuun ja ett sin
olit hnen taiteensa paihe."

"Min olin hyvin kiintynyt Basiliin", sanoi Dorian surunvoittoisella
nell. "Mutta eivtk ihmiset sano, ett hn on murhattu?"

"Ah, muutamat lehdet. Min en sit usko. Min tiedn, ett Parisissa on
pahoja pesi, mutta Basil ei ollut sellainen, joka niihin olisi
pyrkinyt. Hn ei ollut utelias. Se oli hnen pvikansa."

"Mit sin sanoisit, Harry, jos min vittisin murhanneeni Basilin?"
kysyi nuorempi mies. Hn tarkkasi lordi Henry kiihkesti sanottuansa
sen.

"Min sanoisin, rakas ystv, ett sin yrittisit olla huvittava
tavalla, joka ei sinulle sovi. Rikos on aina alhaista, samoinkuin kaikki
alhaisuus on rikosta. Sin, Dorian, et voisi tehd murhaa. Olen
pahoillani, jos sanoillani loukkaan turhamaisuuttasi, mutta min
vakuutan sinulle, ett se on totta. Rikos kuuluu kokonaan alhaisempiin
luokkiin. Min en moiti heit yhtn. Luullakseni rikos merkitsee heille
samaa kuin taide meille, se on vain keino, jonka avulla voi hankkia
itselleen tavattomampaa mielenkiihoitusta."

"Keino, jonka avulla voi hankkia mielenkiihoitusta? Luuletko, ett mies,
joka kerran on tehnyt murhan, voisi tehd sen toistamiseen? l koeta
vitt sit minulle."

"Ah! kaikki voi muuttua nautinnoksi, jos sit tekee kylliksi usein",
huudahti lordi Henry nauraen. "Se on yksi elmn trkeimpi
salaisuuksia. Mutta min luulisin kuitenkin, ett murha aina on
erehdyst. Ei pitisi koskaan tehd mitn, josta ei voisi keskustella
pivllisen jlkeen. Mutta jttkmme Basil parka. Tahtoisin mielellni
uskoa, ett hnt on kohdannut niin romantinen loppu, kuin mit sin
oletat; mutta min en voi. Minun luullakseni hn on pudonnut
omnibussista Seine virtaan ja ajuri on keksinyt koko jutun. Niin, min
luulen todellakin, ett se on ollut hnen loppunsa. Min nen hnen
makaavan sellln likaisenvihress vedess, raskaat proomut kulkevat
hnen ylitsens ja pitk meriruohoa on takertunut hnen hiuksiinsa.
Tiedtks, min en luule, ett hn en olisi saanut hyv tyt
ksistn. Kymmenen viime vuonna hnen taiteensa oli mennyt koko lailla
alaspin."

Dorian huokasi ja lordi Henry astui huoneen yli ja alkoi silitell
harvinaisen, javalaisen papukaijan pt. Se oli suuri, harmaasulkainen
lintu, jonka rinta ja pyrst olivat ruusunpunaiset, ja joka keinui
bambupuikon varassa. Kun hnen kapeat sormensa koskettelivat sit, niin
se ktki mustat, lasimaiset silmns valkoisten, ryppyisten luomien alle
ja alkoi vaappua edes-takaisin.

"Niin", jatkoi lordi Henry kntyen ympri ja veten nenliinan
taskustaan; "hnen taiteensa meni alaspin. Se oli iknkuin kadottanut
jotakin. Se oli kadottanut ihanteensa. Kun kiihke ystvyys sinun ja
hnen vlilln loppui, niin hnkn ei ollut en suuri taiteilija.
Mik teidt oikeastaan eroitti? Luultavasti sin vsyit hneen. Siin
tapauksessa hn ei koskaan voinut antaa sinulle anteeksi. Se on kaikkien
ikvien miesten tapa. Kuulehan, minne se mainio muotokuva on joutunut,
jonka hn sinusta maalasi? En luullakseni ole koskaan nhnyt sit sen
jlkeen kuin se valmistui. Ah! sehn on totta, sin sanoit vuosia sitten
lhettneesi sen Selbyhyn ja ett se hvisi tai varastettiin tiell.
Etk saanut sit koskaan takaisin? Mik vahinko! Se oli todellakin
mestariteos. Muistan ett olisin tahtonut ostaa sen. Jospa todellakin
olisin sen tehnyt. Se kuului Basilin parhaasen aikaan. Sen jlkeen hnen
tyssn ilmeni kummallinen sekoitus huonoa tekniikkaa ja hyvi aiheita,
jotka aina oikeuttavat miehen nimittmn itsen englantilaisen taiteen
edustajaksi. Ilmoititko sin siit lehdiss? Kyll sinun olisi pitnyt."

"En muista", sanoi Dorian. "Luultavasti min ilmoitin. Mutta min en
koskaan pitnyt siit. Olen pahoillani ett istuin mallina. Yksin sen
muistokin on minulle kiusallinen. Miksi sin puhut siit? Se muistuttaa
minun mieleeni seuraavat skeet -- 'Hamletista' ne luullakseni ovat --
miten ne nyt kuuluivatkaan? --

    "Kuin kuva surun, muoto murehen,
    kuin kasvot, joist' on sydn poissa.

"Niin sellainen se juuri oli."

Lordi Henry nauroi. "Jos ihminen el taiteellisesti, niin aivot ovat
hnen sydmens," hn vastasi vaipuen nojatuoliin.

Dorian Gray pudisti ptn ja soitti pari vienoa akordia. "Kuin kuva
surun, muoto murehen", -- hn toisti, "kuin kasvot, joist' on sydn
poissa."

Vanhempi mies nojautui taakse ja katseli Doriania puoleksi suljetuin
silmin. "Kuulehan, Dorian", hn sanoi hetken kuluttua, "mit se auttaa
ihmist, jos hn kaiken maailman voittaisi -- miten ne sanat taas
kuuluivat? -- ja sielullensa saisi vahingon?"

Soitto keskeytyi, Dorian Gray hyphti pystyyn ja hykksi ystvns luo.
"Miksi sin kysyt sit minulta, Harry?"

"Rakas ystv", sanoi lordi Henry kohottaen hmmstyneen
kulmakarvojansa, "min kysyin siksi ett luulin sinun voivan antaa
minulle siihen vastausta. Siin kaikki. Min kuljin Hyde Parkin lpi
viime sunnuntaina ja aivan lhell Marble Archia seisoi pieni joukko
huonosti puettuja ihmisi, jotka kuuntelivat tavallista katusaarnaajaa.
Kun min kuljin ohi, niin kuulin miehen heittvn tuon kysymyksen
kuulijakunnalleen. Se teki minuun hyvin draamallisen vaikutuksen.
Lontoossa on paljon tuollaisia kohtauksia. Kostea sunnuntai, kmpel
Kristus sadetakissa, sairaalloisia, kalpeita kasvoja kehss hnen
ymprilln katkonaisen ja tippuvan sateenvarjokatoksen alla ja
ihmeellinen lause, jonka hermostuneet huulet kimakasti sinkahuttavat
ilmaan -- koko tuo kohtaus omalla tavallaan oli varsin onnistunut. Min
aioin sanoa profeetalle ett taiteella on sielu, mutta ei ihmisell.
Mutta pelknp ettei hn olisi ymmrtnyt minua."

"lhn, Harry. Sielu on kauhistuttava tosiasia. Sit voi ostaa ja myd
ja vaihtaa. Sit voi myrkytt ja se voi tulla tydelliseksi. Kussakin
meiss on sielu. Sen min tiedn."

"Oletko aivan varma siit, Dorian?"

"Aivan varma."

"Ah! sitten se on harhaluulo. Se mist on aivan varma, ei ole koskaan
totta. Siin juuri uskon ja romantiikan opetuksen onnettomuus on. Kuinka
vakava sin olet! l huoli olla noin juhlallinen. Mit sinua tai minua
liikuttaa aikakautemme taikausko? Ei, me emme usko en sieluun. Soita
minulle jotakin. Soita minulle joku nokturni, Dorian, ja soittaessasi
kerro minulle hiljaisella nell, mill tavalla olet voinut silytt
nuoruuttasi. Sinulla on varmaan jokin salainen keino. Min olen vain
kymmenen vuotta sinua vanhempi, ja kuitenkin min olen ryppyinen ja
kuihtunut ja keltainen. Sin olet todellakin ihmeellinen, Dorian. Et
koskaan ole ollut kauniimpi kuin tn iltana. Sin palautat minun
mieleeni sen pivn, jolloin me ensi kerran tapasimme toisemme. Sin
olit hiukan pyrekasvoinen, hyvin ujo ja aivan erikoinen. Sin olet
tietysti muuttunut, mutta et ulkomuodoltasi. Tahtoisin saada tiet
sinun salaisen keinosi. Jos voisin saada takaisin nuoruuteni, niin
olisin valmis tekemn vaikka mit, paitsi voimistelemaan, nousemaan
varhain yls ja olemaan arvokas. Nuoruus! Ei ole mitn sen kaltaista.
Mieletnt on puhua nuoruuden ymmrtmttmyydest. Ainoat ihmiset,
joiden mielipiteit min jonkunlaisella kunnioituksella nykyn
kuuntelen, ovat minua paljoa nuoremmat. Ne seisovat minun ylpuolellani.
Elm on heille ilmaissut uusimmat ihmeens. Ja vanhat, min vastustan
heit aina. Min teen sen periaatteellisesti. Jos kysyt heidn
mielipidettns jostakin asiasta, joka tapahtui eilen, niin he
juhlallisesti tuovat ilmi mielipiteit vuodelta 1820, jolloin kytettiin
korkeita, jykki kaulahuiveja, uskottiin vaikka mit, eik tietty
kerrassaan mitn. Kuinka kaunis tuo kappale on, jota sin soitat!
Svelsikhn Chopin sen Majorcassa, jossa meri huuhteli hnen huvilaansa
joka puolelta ja suolavaahto pirskui ikkunaruutuja vasten? Se on ihmeen
romantillinen. Mik onni, ett on olemassa edes yksi taidelaji, jota ei
voi jljitell! l lakkaa soittamasta. Min tarvitsen tn iltana
soittoa. Minun mielestni sin olet kuin nuori Apollo ja min Marsyas,
joka kuuntelen sinua. Minulla on huolia, joista sinullakaan, Dorian, ei
ole aavistusta. Vanhuuden tragedia ei ole siin ett vanhenee, vaan
siin ett pysyy nuorena. Minua peloittaa joskus oma nuoruuteni. Ah,
Dorian, kuinka onnellinen sin olet! Mik ihana elm sinulla on ollut!
Sin olet kallistanut syvlt elmn pikaria. Sin olet pusertanut
viinirypleet vasten omaa suulakeasi. Ei mitn ole sinulta salattu. Ja
kaikki tuo ei ole vaikuttanut sinuun enemmn kuin musiikkikaan. Se ei
ole turmellut sinua. Sin olet aivan sama kuin ennenkin".

"Min en ole sama kuin ennen, Harry."

"Kyll, sin olet sama. Tahtoisinpa tiet millaiseksi sinun elmsi
viel kehittyy. l turmele sit kieltymyksill. Nyt sin olet
tydellinen tyyppi. l tee itsesi eptydelliseksi. Nyt sin olet
aivan virheetn. Ei sinun tarvitse pudistaa ptsi, sin tiedt sen
itsekin. Kuules, Dorian, l pet itsesi. Elm ei voi tahdolla eik
aikomuksilla hallita. Elm on kokoonpantu hermoista, syist ja
vitkalleen rakennetuista soluista, joissa ajatus piilee ja intohimo
uneksii. Voit olettaa olevasi hyvss turvassa ja voimakas. Mutta
satunnainen vrin vivahdus huoneessa, aamutaivas, erityinen hajuvesi,
josta ennen olet pitnyt ja joka kki johdattaa mieleesi herkki
muistoja, runose, jonka lydt uudelleen, pari tahtia kappaleesta, jota
et en soita -- min sanon sinulle, Dorian, tuon tapaisista asioista
meidn elmmme riippuu. Browning on kirjoittanut siit jossain; mutta
meidn omat aistimme luovat ne meille. On hetki, jolloin kki tunnen
valkoisten sireenien tuoksua, ja silloin min ajatuksissani eln
uudestaan elmni ihanimman kuukauden. Min tahtoisin olla sinun
sijassasi, Dorian. Maailma on pivitellyt meidn molempien thden, mutta
se on aina jumaloinut sinua. Ja se on aina jumaloiva sinua. Sin edustat
sit tyyppi, jota meidn aikakautemme tavoittelee ja jota se pelk
lytvns. Min olen niin iloinen ettet sin koskaan ole tehnyt mitn,
ettet ole veistnyt mitn kuvapatsasta, etk maalannut taulua, et
yleens luonut mitn ulkopuolella omaa itsesi! Elm on ollut sinun
taiteesi. Olet sveltnyt oman itsesi. Sinun pivsi ovat olleet sinun
runoelmasi."

Dorian nousi pianon rest ja sivalsi kdelln hiuksiaan. "Niin, elm
on ollut ihana", hn mutisi, "mutta en tahtoisi sit el uudestaan,
Harry. Ja sinun ei pitisi sanoa minulle tuollaisia liioitteluja. Sin
et tunne minua kokonaan. Luulenpa, ett jos tuntisit, niin sinkin
kntisit minulle selksi. Sin naurat. l naura."

"Miksi et soita en, Dorian? Soita uudestaan tuo nokturni. Katsos tuota
suurta hunajanvrist kuuta, joka riippuu hmrss ilmassa. Se odottaa
ett sin tenhoisit sit, ja jos sin soitat, niin se tulee lhemmksi
maata. Etk tahdo? Mennn sitten klubiin. Tm ilta on ollut
ihastuttava, ja meidn tytyy lopettaa se yht hauskasti. Whiten luona
on joku, joka vlttmtt tahtoo tutustua sinuun -- nuori lordi Poole,
Bournemouthin vanhin poika. Hn matkii sinun kaulahuivejasi ja pyysi
minua esittmn hnet sinulle. Hn on hyvin miellyttv, ja muistuttaa
sinua koko lailla."

"Toivottavasti hn ei sit tee", sanoi Dorian surullinen ilme
silmissn. "Mutta tnn min olen vsynyt, Harry. En min tule
klubiin. Kello on lhes yksitoista, ja min tahtoisin varhain pst
vuoteesen."

"l lhde. Et koskaan ole soittanut niin hyvin kuin tnn. Sinun
kosketuksesi oli aivan mainio. Siin oli tunnetta, jota en ennen ole
siin kuullut."

"Se johtuu siit, ett aion tulla hyvksi", hn vastasi hymyillen. "Min
olen jo hiukan muuttunut."

"Minun silmissni sin et voi muuttua, Dorian", sanoi lordi Henry. "Sin
ja min, me pysymme aina ystvin."

"Ja kuitenkin sin kerran myrkytit minut kirjalla. Sit minun ei koskaan
pitisi antaa anteeksi. Harry, lupaa minulle, ettet koskaan lainaa sit
kirjaa kellekn. Se tuottaa onnettomuutta."

"Rakas ystv, rupeatko todellakin saarnaamaan siveytt. Pian sin kai
alat kierrell paikasta toiseen aivan kuin kntyneet ja hernneet, ja
varoitat ihmisi kaikista niist synneist, joihin itse olet
kyllstynyt. Sin olet aivan liian kaunis siihen toimeen. Ja sit paitsi
ei siit ole mitn hyty. Sin ja min olemme mit me olemme, ja
pysymme sellaisina aina. On aivan mahdotonta ett joku kirja voisi
myrkytt ihmist. Taide ei vaikuta tekoihin. Se tukehduttaa vain
toimintahalun. Se on aivan hedelmtnt. Kirjat, joita maailma sanoo
epsiveellisiksi, ovat sellaisia, jotka paljastavat maailman oman
hpen. Siin kaikki. Mutta me emme huoli vitell kirjallisuudesta.
Tule huomenna minun luokseni. Min lhden yhdelttoista ratsastamaan.
Voimme menn yhdess, ja min otan sinut sitten mukanani aamiaiselle
lady Branksomen luo. Hn on ihastuttava nainen ja tahtoisi neuvotella
sinun kanssasi seinverhoista, joita hn aikoo ostaa. l unohda tulla.
Vai symmek aamiaista pienen herttuattaremme kanssa? Hn sanoo, ettei
hn koskaan en tapaa sinua. Ehk Gladys on kyllstyttnyt sinua? Sen
min arvasinkin. Hnen terv kielens hermostuttaa ajan pitkn. No
niin, joka tapauksessa olet kello yhdelttoista tlt."

"Tytyyk minun tulla, Harry?"

"Tietysti. Hyde Park on ihana tt nyky. Enp usko ett siell on ollut
kauniita sireenej siit kevst saakka, jolloin me tutustuimme
toisiimme."

"Hyv on. Min tulen kello yhdelttoista", sanoi Dorian. "Hyv yt,
Harry." Kun hn astui ovelle, niin hn epri hetken aikaa, iknkuin
hnell olisi ollut viel jotakin sanottavaa. Sitten hn huokasi ja meni
ulos.




LUKU XX.


Y oli ihana, niin lmmin, ett hn heitti pllystakkinsa vain
ksivarrelleen, eik sitonut edes silkkihuivia kaulaan. Astuessaan kotia
kohti ja poltellessaan paperossia kulki kaksi nuorta miest
seurustelupuvussa hnen ohitsensa. Hn kuuli toisen kuiskaavan toiselle:
"Tuo on Dorian Gray." Hn muisti, miten hyvilln hn oli ollut kun
hnt huomattiin tai katseltiin tai kun ihmiset puhuivat hnest. Nyt
hnt vsytti, kun hn kuuli vain nimenskin mainittavan. Kun hn
ajatteli sit pient kyl, jossa hn viime aikoina usein oli kynyt,
niin sen suurin viehtys oli juuri siin, ettei kukaan hnt siell
tuntenut. Hn oli usein sanonut tytlle, jonka rakkauden hn oli
viekoitellut puoleensa, ett hn oli kyh, ja tytt oli uskonut hnt.
Hn oli kerran sanonut hnelle olevansa paha, ja tytt oli vain nauranut
hnelle ja vastannut, ett pahat ihmiset olivat aina vanhoja ja rumia.
Kuinka hn osasi nauraa! -- aivan kuin rastas olisi laulanut. Ja kuinka
kaunis hn oli ollut pumpulipuvuissansa ja suurissa hatuissaan! Hn oli
aivan oppimaton, mutta hn omisti kaiken sen, mink Dorian jo oli
kadottanut.

Kun Dorian saapui kotiin, niin palvelija oli viel ylhll odottamassa
hnt. Hn lhetti hnet maata ja heittytyi kirjastonsohvalle ja alkoi
ajatella sit mit lordi Henry oli sanonut hnelle.

Oliko se todellakin totta, ettei ihminen koskaan muuttunut? Hn alkoi
kiihkesti kaivata poikavuosiensa tahratonta puhtautta --
ruusunvalkoista lapsuuttaan, joksi lordi Henry oli kerran sit sanonut.
Hn tiesi ett hn oli tahrannut itsens, turmellut ajatuksensa ja
mielikuvituksensa kauheuksilla; hnen vaikutuksensa toisiin oli ollut
huono, ja hn oli tuntenut vain hurjaa iloa nhdessn toisten
turmeluksen; hn oli saattanut hpen kaikki parhaat ja toivorikkaimmat
niist henkilist, jotka olivat joutuneet hnen tiellens. Mutta oliko
tuo kaikki auttamatonta? Eik hnell ollut vhintkn toivoa jljell?

Ah! min hirven ylpeyden ja kiihkon hetken hn oli toivonutkaan, ett
muotokuva kantaisi elmn taakan hnen puolestansa ja hn itse saisi
silytt ikuisen nuoruuden himmentymttmn kirkkauden! Siin oli alku
kaikkiin hnen hairahduksiinsa. Paljoa parempi jos jokaista synti heti
rangaistus olisi seurannut. Rangaistus aina puhdisti. Ihmisten tulisi
rukoilla vanhurskasta Jumalaa: "Rankaise meit synneistmme", eik:
"Anna meille meidn syntimme anteeksi."

Ihmeellisesti veistetty peili, jonka lordi Henry oli antanut hnelle
monta vuotta sitten, seisoi pydll, ja valkeajalkaiset kupidot
naureskelivat sen kehss aivan kuin ennenkin. Hn otti sen kteens
samoinkuin tuona hirven iltana, jolloin hn ensi kertaa oli huomannut
muutoksen onnettomassa muotokuvassaan, ja tuijotti kyyneltynein silmin
sen hiottuun pintaan. Kerran joku, joka hurjasti oli rakastanut hnt,
oli kirjoittanut hnelle mielettmn kirjeen, joka loppui seuraaviin
jumaloiviin sanoihin: "Maailma on muuttunut sen vuoksi, ett sin olet
luotu norsunluusta ja kullasta. Sinun huuliesi kaarevat viivat
kirjoittavat historian uudelleen." Nuo lauseet palasivat hnen mieleens
ja hn toisti niit yh uudestaan. Sitten hn kirosi omaa kauneuttansa
ja viskaten peilin maahan hn musersi sen korollaan hopeasirpaleiksi.
Kauneus oli turmellut hnet, kauneus ja nuoruus, joita hn niin
hartaasti oli itselleen toivonut. Ilman niit hnen elmns olisi
voinut olla moitteeton. Kauneus oli ollut hnelle vain naamarina,
nuoruus vain lumekuvana. Mit nuoruus oikeastaan oli? Viheri,
kypsymtn aika tynn haihtuvia tunnelmia ja sairaalloisia ajatuksia.
Miksi hn oli kantanut sen livreaa? Nuoruus oli pilannut hnet.

Parasta oli olla menneisyytt ajattelematta. Ei mikn voinut sit
muuttaa. Hnen tuli ajatella vain itsens, omaa tulevaisuuttansa. James
Vane oli ktketty nimettmn hautaan Selbyn kirkkomaalla. Alan Campbell
oli ampunut itsens ern yn laboratorissaan; mutta hn ei ollut
ilmaissut sit salaisuutta, jota hnelle oli tyrkytetty. Se huomio, jota
Basil Hallwardin katoaminen oli herttnyt, oli pian hviv. Se oli jo
koko lailla laimentunutkin. Hn oli aivan turvattu. Eik Basil
Hallwardin kuolema se enimmin painanutkaan hnen mieltns. Paljoa
enemmn hnt vaivasi hnen oman sielunsa elv kuolema. Basil oli
maalannut sen muotokuvan, joka oli turmellut hnen elmns. Sit hn ei
voinut hnelle anteeksi antaa. Muotokuva oli syyp kaikkeen. Basil oli
sanonut hnelle sietmttmi asioita, ja kaikkea hn oli
krsivllisesti kestnyt. Murha oli ollut vain hetkellisen hulluuden
seurauksena. Mit taas Alan Campbelliin tuli, niin hnen itsemurhansa
oli hnen oma asiansa. Hn oli sen itse tahtonut. Doriania se ei
liikuttanut.

Uusi elm! Sit hn tarvitsi. Sit hn juuri kaipasikin. Hn oli sen jo
varmasti aloittanutkin. Ainakin hn oli sstnyt yhden viattoman
olennon. Hn ei koskaan en viekoittelisi viatonta. Hn tahtoisi olla
hyv.

Ajatellessaan Hetty Mertonia, hn alkoi tuumia, tokko kuva lukitussa
huoneessa oli muuttunut. Se varmaan ei ollut en yht kauhea kuin
ennen. Ehkp, jos hnen elmns muuttuisi puhtaaksi, hn voisi pyyhki
pois kasvoista huonojen intohimojen jljet. Ehkp paheen jljet olivat
jo kadonneetkin. Hn tahtoi menn katsomaan.

Hn otti lampun kteens ja hiipi portaita yls. Kun hn avasi oven,
niin ilon hymy vlhti hnen ihmeen nuorekkaissa kasvoissansa ja vreili
hetken aikaa hnen suupielissns. Niin, hn tahtoi tulla hyvksi, ja
tuo julma kuva, jota hn niin kauan oli pitnyt piilossa, ei en
herttisi hnen kauhuansa. Hnest tuntui iknkuin kirous jo olisi
poistunut hnest.

Hn astui nettmsti sisn, sulkien oven jljissn, niinkuin hnen
tapansa oli ja veti purppuraisen peitteen kuvan edest. Tuskan ja
pettymyksen huuto psi hnen huuliltansa. Hn ei voinut huomata
vhintkn muutosta, paitsi ett silmiin oli tullut salakavala ilme ja
suun ymprille teeskentelev piirre. Kuva oli yh vielkin inhottava --
jos mahdollista vielkin inhottavampi kuin ennen ja tulipunainen tpl
kdell oli tullut selvemmksi ja nytti aivan kuin vasta vuotaneelta
verelt. Hnt vrisytti. Turhamaisuudestako hn vain oli tehnyt
tuon yhden hyvn tekonsa? Vai oliko hn halunnut vain uutta
mielenkiihdykett, niinkuin lordi Henry oli huomauttanut pilkallisesti
nauraen? Vai oliko hn tahtonut nytell komediaa ja tehd jotakin
jaloa, joka ei ollut sopusoinnussa hnen oman luonteensa kanssa? Tai
ehk kaikki nuo syyt olivat sen vaikuttaneet? Ja miksi punainen tahra
oli suurentunut? Se oli levinnyt aivan kuin hirve tauti ryppyisten
sormien yli. Verta oli jalallakin, aivan kuin sit olisi tippunut siihen
-- verta sillkin kdell, joka ei ollut pidellyt veist. Tunnustaakko?
Pitisik hnen tunnustaa? Antaa itsens ilmi, ja krsi
kuolemanrangaistus? Hn nauroi. Hn tunsi ett tuo ajatus oli mahdoton.
Ja vaikka hn tunnustaisikin, kukapa hnt uskoisi? Eihn ollut
vhintkn jlke murhatusta miehest. Kaikki hnen tavaransa olivat
hvitetyt. Itse hn oli polttanut ne, mitk alhaalla olivat. Ihmiset
sanoisivat hnt vain hulluksi. He salpaisivat vain hnet telkien
taakse, jos hn pysyisi puheissaan... Mutta hnen velvollisuutensa oli
tunnustaa, krsi julkista hpe ja julkisesti katua. On olemassa
Jumala, joka vaatii ihmisi tunnustamaan syntins sek maailman ett
taivaan edess. Ei mikn voinut puhdistaa hnt ennenkuin hn oli
tunnustanut syntins. Syntinsk? Hn kohautti olkapitn. Basil
Hallwardin kuolema tuntui hnest niin vhptiselt. Hn ajatteli
Hetty Mertonia. Se sielun peili, jossa hn itsen tarkasteli, ei ollut
oikeudenmukainen. Turhamaisuuttako? Uteliaisuuttako? Teeskentelyk?
Eik hnen kieltytymisens ollut mitn muuta? Se oli ollut muuta. Hn
ainakin luuli niin. Mutta kuka saattoi sit todistaa?... Ei. Se ei
sittenkn ollut muuta. Turhamaisuudesta hn oli sstnyt hnet.
Teeskentelyhalusta hn oli kantanut hyvyyden naamaria. Uteliaisuudesta
hn oli harjoittanut kieltytymist. Sen hn nyt ymmrsi.

Mutta tuo murha -- seuraisiko se hnt lpi koko elmn? Tytyisik
hnen aina kantaa entisyyden taakkaa? Tytyik hnen todellakin
tunnustaa? Ei, ei koskaan. Ei ollut muuta kuin yksi ainoa pieni todistus
hnt vastaan. Kuva itse -- se oli todistuksena. Hn hvittisi sen.
Miksi hn oli silyttnyt sit ninkin kauan? Ennen hnest oli ollut
hauska seurata, miten se muuttui ja vanheni. Viime aikoina se ei hnt
en huvittanut. Se oli karkoittanut hnelt vain yunen. Poissa
ollessaan hn oli pelnnyt ett jonkun muun silmt osuisivat siihen. Se
oli kylvnyt alakuloisuutta hnen nautintoihinsa. Se oli pilannut monta
kertaa hnelt ilon, kun hn oli sit vain muistellutkin. Se oli ollut
iknkuin hnen omanatuntonansa. Niin, se oli ollut omanatuntona. Nyt
hn sen hvittisi.

Dorian katsoi ymprilleen ja nki veitsen, jolla hn oli surmannut Basil
Hallwardin. Hn oli puhdistanut sen monta kertaa, kunnes siin ei ollut
mitn tarhaa. Se oli kirkas ja kiiltv. Koska se oli tappanut
maalarin, niin se voisi mys tappaa maalarin tyn ja kaiken sen mik
siihen sisltyi. Se tappaisi entisyyden, ja kun se kerta oli kuollut,
niin hn olisi vapaa. Se tappaisi tmn hirven sielunelmn, ja kun sen
hirmuisia varoituksia ei ollut en, niin hn psisi rauhaan. Hn
tarttui veitseen ja puhkaisi sill kuvan.

Kuului huuto ja kolaus. Se oli niin hirve tuskanhuuto, ett palvelijat
hersivt ja hiipivt ulos huoneistaan. Kaksi herraa, jotka kulkivat
torilla, pyshtyivt ja katsahtivat yls suureen taloon. He astuivat
kunnes he kohtasivat poliisin ja palasivat hnen kanssansa samalle
paikalle. Mies soitti kelloa useampaan kertaan, mutta ei kukaan
vastannut. Talo oli kauttaaltaan pime, tulta vlkkyi vain ylkerran
ikkunasta. Hetken kuluttua mies poistui ja asettui lheiseen
porttikytvn voidakseen pit taloa silmll.

"Kenenk talo tuo on, konstapeli?" kysyi vanhempi molemmista herroista.

"Mr. Dorian Grayn, herra", vastasi poliisi.

Herrat katsahtivat toisiinsa poistuessansa ja naureskelivat. Toinen oli
sir Henry Ashtonin set.

Sisll palvelijoiden puolella puhelivat palvelijat puolipukimissaan
hiljaa kuiskaten keskenn. Vanha mrs. Leaf itki ja vnsi ksins.
Francis oli kalpea kuin kuolema.

Neljnnestunnin kuluttua hn lksi yhdess ajurin ja lakeijan kanssa
ylkertaan. He kolkuttivat, mutta vastausta ei kuulunut. He huusivat,
mutta kaikkialla oli hiljaista. Vihdoin, turhaan koetettuaan murtaa oven
auki, he kiipesivt katolle ja laskeutuivat alas balkongille. Ikkunat
heltisivt helposti; haat olivat vanhat.

Kun he astuivat sisn, niin he nkivt seinll mainion kuvan
isnnstns, sellaisena kuin he viimeksi olivat hnet nhneet,
nuoruuden ja kauneuden tydess loistossa. Lattialla makasi kuollut mies
seurustelupuvussa, veitsi rinnassa. Hn oli kuihtunut, ryppyinen ja
inhottava kasvoiltansa. Vasta sitten kun he olivat tarkastaneet hnen
sormuksiansa, he tunsivat, kuka hn oli.
</article>
<article name="The Raven">
The Raven


by

Edgar Allan Poe





  Once upon a midnight dreary, while I pondered, weak and weary,
  Over many a quaint and curious volume of forgotten lore--
  While I nodded, nearly napping, suddenly there came a tapping,
  As of some one gently rapping, rapping at my chamber door.
  "'Tis some visitor," I muttered, "tapping at my chamber door--
                                     Only this and nothing more."

  Ah, distinctly I remember it was in the bleak December,
  And each separate dying ember wrought its ghost upon the floor.
  Eagerly I wished the morrow;--vainly I had sought to borrow
  From my books surcease of sorrow--sorrow for the lost Lenore--
  For the rare and radiant maiden whom the angels name Lenore--
                                     Nameless here for evermore.

  And the silken sad uncertain rustling of each purple curtain
  Thrilled me--filled me with fantastic terrors never felt before;
  So that now, to still the beating of my heart, I stood repeating
  "'Tis some visiter entreating entrance at my chamber door--
  Some late visiter entreating entrance at my chamber door;
                                     This it is and nothing more."

  Presently my soul grew stronger; hesitating then no longer,
  "Sir," said I, "or Madam, truly your forgiveness I implore;
  But the fact is I was napping, and so gently you came rapping,
  And so faintly you came tapping, tapping at my chamber door,
  That I scarce was sure I heard you"--here I opened wide the door--
                                     Darkness there and nothing more.

  Deep into that darkness peering, long I stood there wondering, fearing,
  Doubting, dreaming dreams no mortals ever dared to dream before;
  But the silence was unbroken, and the stillness gave no token,
  And the only word there spoken was the whispered word, "Lenore?"
  This I whispered, and an echo murmured back the word, "Lenore!"--
                                     Merely this and nothing more.

  Back into the chamber turning, all my soul within me burning,
  Soon again I heard a tapping something louder than before.
  "Surely," said I, "surely that is something at my window lattice;
  Let me see, then, what thereat is and this mystery explore--
  Let my heart be still a moment and this mystery explore;--
                                     'Tis the wind and nothing more.

  Open here I flung the shutter, when, with many a flirt and flutter,
  In there stepped a stately Raven of the saintly days of yore.
  Not the least obeisance made he; not a minute stopped or stayed he,
  But, with mien of lord or lady, perched above my chamber door--
  Perched upon a bust of Pallas just above my chamber door--
                                     Perched, and sat, and nothing more.

  Then the ebony bird beguiling my sad fancy into smiling,
  By the grave and stern decorum of the countenance it wore,
  "Though thy crest be shorn and shaven, thou," I said, "art sure no craven,
  Ghastly grim and ancient Raven wandering from the Nightly shore--
  Tell me what thy lordly name is on the Night's Plutonian shore!"
                                     Quoth the Raven, "Nevermore."

  Much I marvelled this ungainly fowl to hear discourse so plainly,
  Though its answer little meaning--little relevancy bore;
  For we cannot help agreeing that no living human being
  Ever yet was blessed with seeing bird above his chamber door--
  Bird or beast upon the sculptured bust above his chamber door,
                                     With such name as "Nevermore."

  But the Raven, sitting lonely on that placid bust, spoke only
  That one word, as if its soul in that one word he did outpour
  Nothing farther then he uttered; not a feather then he fluttered--
  Till I scarcely more than muttered: "Other friends have flown before--
  On the morrow _he_ will leave me, as my Hopes have flown before."
                                     Then the bird said "Nevermore."

  Startled at the stillness broken by reply so aptly spoken,
  "Doubtless," said I, "what it utters is its only stock and store,
  Caught from some unhappy master whom unmerciful Disaster
  Followed fast and followed faster till his songs one burden bore--
  Till the dirges of his Hope that melancholy burden bore
                                     Of 'Never--nevermore.'"

  But the Raven still beguiling all my sad soul into smiling,
  Straight I wheeled a cushioned seat in front of bird and bust and door;
  Then, upon the velvet sinking, I betook myself to linking
  Fancy unto fancy, thinking what this ominous bird of yore--
  What this grim, ungainly, ghastly, gaunt, and ominous bird of yore
                                     Meant in croaking "Nevermore."

  This I sat engaged in guessing, but no syllable expressing
  To the fowl whose fiery eyes now burned into my bosom's core;
  This and more I sat divining, with my head at ease reclining
  On the cushion's velvet lining that the lamp-light gloated o'er,
  But whose velvet violet lining with the lamp-light gloating o'er
                                     _She_ shall press, ah, nevermore!

  Then, methought, the air grew denser, perfumed from an unseen censer
  Swung by Seraphim whose foot-falls tinkled on the tufted floor.
  "Wretch," I cried, "thy God hath lent thee--by these angels he hath sent thee
  Respite--respite and nepenthe from thy memories of Lenore!
  Quaff, oh quaff this kind nepenthe and forget this lost Lenore!"
                                     Quoth the Raven, "Nevermore."

  "Prophet!" said I, "thing of evil!--prophet still, if bird or devil!--
  Whether Tempter sent, or whether tempest tossed thee here ashore,
  Desolate, yet all undaunted, on this desert land enchanted--
  On this home by Horror haunted--tell me truly, I implore--
  Is there--_is_ there balm in Gilead?--tell me--tell me, I implore!"
                                     Quoth the Raven, "Nevermore."

  "Prophet!" said I, "thing of evil!--prophet still, if bird or devil!
  By that Heaven that bends above us--by that God we both adore--
  Tell this soul with sorrow laden if, within the distant Aidenn,
  It shall clasp a sainted maiden whom the angels name Lenore--
  Clasp a rare and radiant maiden whom the angels name Lenore."
                                     Quoth the Raven, "Nevermore."

  "Be that our sign of parting, bird or fiend!" I shrieked, upstarting--
  "Get thee back into the tempest and the Night's Plutonian shore!
  Leave no black plume as a token of that lie thy soul has spoken!
  Leave my loneliness unbroken!--quit the bust above my door!
  Take thy beak from out my heart, and take thy form from off my door!"
                                     Quoth the Raven, "Nevermore."

  And the Raven, never flitting, still is sitting, still is sitting
  On the pallid bust of Pallas just above my chamber door;
  And his eyes have all the seeming of a demon's that is dreaming
  And the lamp-light o'er him streaming throws his shadows on the floor;
  And my soul from out that shadow that lies floating on the floor
                                     Shall be lifted--nevermore!
</article>
<article name="Relativity: The Special and General Theory">
Produced by Robert Hux



cover 



Relativity: The Special and General Theory



by Albert Einstein



Authorised Translation by Robert W. Lawson



ALBERT EINSTEIN REFERENCE ARCHIVE
RELATIVITY: THE SPECIAL AND GENERAL THEORY
BY ALBERT EINSTEIN



Written: 1916 (this revised edition: 1924)
Source: Relativity: The Special and General Theory (1920)
Publisher: Methuen & Co Ltd
First Published: December, 1916
Translated: Robert W. Lawson (Authorised translation)
Transcription/Markup: Brian Basgen
Transcription to text: Gregory B. Newby
Thanks to: Einstein Reference Archive (marxists.org)
The Einstein Reference Archive is online at:
http://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/einstein/index.htm



Contents


 Preface

 Part I: The Special Theory of Relativity
 I. Physical Meaning of Geometrical Propositions
 II. The System of Co-ordinates
 III. Space and Time in Classical Mechanics
 IV. The Galileian System of Co-ordinates
 V. The Principle of Relativity (in the Restricted Sense)
 VI. The Theorem of the Addition of Velocities employed in Classical Mechanics
 VII. The Apparent Incompatability of the Law of Propagation of Light with the Principle of Relativity
 VIII. On the Idea of Time in Physics
 IX. The Relativity of Simultaneity
 X. On the Relativity of the Conception of Distance
 XI. The Lorentz Transformation
 XII. The Behaviour of Measuring-Rods and Clocks in Motion
 XIII. Theorem of the Addition of Velocities. The Experiment of Fizeau
 XIV. The Heuristic Value of the Theory of Relativity
 XV. General Results of the Theory
 XVI. Experience and the Special Theory of Relativity
 XVII. Minkowskis Four-dimensional Space

 Part II: The General Theory of Relativity
 XVIII. Special and General Principle of Relativity
 XIX. The Gravitational Field
 XX. The Equality of Inertial and Gravitational Mass as an Argument for the General Postulate of Relativity
 XXI. In What Respects are the Foundations of Classical Mechanics and of the Special Theory of Relativity Unsatisfactory?
 XXII. A Few Inferences from the General Principle of Relativity
 XXIII. Behaviour of Clocks and Measuring-Rods on a Rotating Body of Reference
 XXIV. Euclidean and non-Euclidean Continuum
 XXV. Gaussian Co-ordinates
 XXVI. The Space-Time Continuum of the Special Theory of Relativity Considered as a Euclidean Continuum
 XXVII. The Space-Time Continuum of the General Theory of Relativity is Not a Euclidean Continuum
 XXVIII. Exact Formulation of the General Principle of Relativity
 XXIX. The Solution of the Problem of Gravitation on the Basis of the General Principle of Relativity

 Part III: Considerations on the Universe as a Whole
 XXX. Cosmological Difficulties of Newtons Theory
 XXXI. The Possibility of a Finite and yet Unbounded Universe
 XXXII. The Structure of Space According to the General Theory of Relativity

 Appendices:
 I. Simple Derivation of the Lorentz Transformation (supplementary to section XI)
 II. Minkowskis Four-Dimensional Space (World) (supplementary to section XVII)
 III. The Experimental Confirmation of the General Theory of Relativity
 IV. The Structure of Space According to the General Theory of Relativity (supplementary to section XXXII)
 V. Relativity and the Problem of Space



Note: The fifth Appendix was added by Einstein at the time of the
fifteenth re-printing of this book; and as a result is still under
copyright restrictions so cannot be added without the permission of the
publisher.


PREFACE

The present book is intended, as far as possible, to give an exact
insight into the theory of Relativity to those readers who, from a
general scientific and philosophical point of view, are interested in
the theory, but who are not conversant with the mathematical apparatus
of theoretical physics. The work presumes a standard of education
corresponding to that of a university matriculation examination, and,
despite the shortness of the book, a fair amount of patience and force
of will on the part of the reader. The author has spared himself no
pains in his endeavour to present the main ideas in the simplest and
most intelligible form, and on the whole, in the sequence and
connection in which they actually originated. In the interest of
clearness, it appeared to me inevitable that I should repeat myself
frequently, without paying the slightest attention to the elegance of
the presentation. I adhered scrupulously to the precept of that
brilliant theoretical physicist L. Boltzmann, according to whom matters
of elegance ought to be left to the tailor and to the cobbler. I make
no pretence of having withheld from the reader difficulties which are
inherent to the subject. On the other hand, I have purposely treated
the empirical physical foundations of the theory in a step-motherly
fashion, so that readers unfamiliar with physics may not feel like the
wanderer who was unable to see the forest for the trees. May the book
bring some one a few happy hours of suggestive thought!

December, 1916


 A. EINSTEIN


PART I: THE SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY


I.

PHYSICAL MEANING OF GEOMETRICAL PROPOSITIONS

In your schooldays most of you who read this book made acquaintance
with the noble building of Euclids geometry, and you rememberperhaps
with more respect than lovethe magnificent structure, on the lofty
staircase of which you were chased about for uncounted hours by
conscientious teachers. By reason of our past experience, you would
certainly regard everyone with disdain who should pronounce even the
most out-of-the-way proposition of this science to be untrue. But
perhaps this feeling of proud certainty would leave you immediately if
some one were to ask you: What, then, do you mean by the assertion
that these propositions are true? Let us proceed to give this question
a little consideration.

Geometry sets out from certain conceptions such as plane, point,
and straight line, with which we are able to associate more or less
definite ideas, and from certain simple propositions (axioms) which, in
virtue of these ideas, we are inclined to accept as true. Then, on
the basis of a logical process, the justification of which we feel
ourselves compelled to admit, all remaining propositions are shown to
follow from those axioms, _i.e._ they are proven. A proposition is then
correct (true) when it has been derived in the recognised manner from
the axioms. The question of truth of the individual geometrical
propositions is thus reduced to one of the truth of the axioms. Now
it has long been known that the last question is not only unanswerable
by the methods of geometry, but that it is in itself entirely without
meaning. We cannot ask whether it is true that only one straight line
goes through two points. We can only say that Euclidean geometry deals
with things called straight lines, to each of which is ascribed the
property of being uniquely determined by two points situated on it. The
concept true does not tally with the assertions of pure geometry,
because by the word true we are eventually in the habit of
designating always the correspondence with a real object; geometry,
however, is not concerned with the relation of the ideas involved in it
to objects of experience, but only with the logical connection of these
ideas among themselves.

It is not difficult to understand why, in spite of this, we feel
constrained to call the propositions of geometry true. Geometrical
ideas correspond to more or less exact objects in nature, and these
last are undoubtedly the exclusive cause of the genesis of those ideas.
Geometry ought to refrain from such a course, in order to give to its
structure the largest possible logical unity. The practice, for
example, of seeing in a distance two marked positions on a
practically rigid body is something which is lodged deeply in our habit
of thought. We are accustomed further to regard three points as being
situated on a straight line, if their apparent positions can be made to
coincide for observation with one eye, under suitable choice of our
place of observation.

If, in pursuance of our habit of thought, we now supplement the
propositions of Euclidean geometry by the single proposition that two
points on a practically rigid body always correspond to the same
distance (line-interval), independently of any changes in position to
which we may subject the body, the propositions of Euclidean geometry
then resolve themselves into propositions on the possible relative
position of practically rigid bodies.[1] Geometry which has been
supplemented in this way is then to be treated as a branch of physics.
We can now legitimately ask as to the truth of geometrical
propositions interpreted in this way, since we are justified in asking
whether these propositions are satisfied for those real things we have
associated with the geometrical ideas. In less exact terms we can
express this by saying that by the truth of a geometrical proposition
in this sense we understand its validity for a construction with rule
and compasses.


 [1] It follows that a natural object is associated also with a
 straight line. Three points _A, B_ and _C_ on a rigid body thus lie in
 a straight line when the points _A_ and _C_ being given, _B_ is chosen
 such that the sum of the distances _AB_ and _BC_ is as short as
 possible. This incomplete suggestion will suffice for the present
 purpose.


Of course the conviction of the truth of geometrical propositions in
this sense is founded exclusively on rather incomplete experience. For
the present we shall assume the truth of the geometrical
propositions, then at a later stage (in the general theory of
relativity) we shall see that this truth is limited, and we shall
consider the extent of its limitation.


II.

THE SYSTEM OF CO-ORDINATES

On the basis of the physical interpretation of distance which has been
indicated, we are also in a position to establish the distance between
two points on a rigid body by means of measurements. For this purpose
we require a distance (rod _S_) which is to be used once and for all,
and which we employ as a standard measure. If, now, _A_ and _B_ are two
points on a rigid body, we can construct the line joining them
according to the rules of geometry; then, starting from _A_, we can
mark off the distance _S_ time after time until we reach _B_. The
number of these operations required is the numerical measure of the
distance _AB_. This is the basis of all measurement of length.[2]


 [2] Here we have assumed that there is nothing left over _i.e._ that
 the measurement gives a whole number. This difficulty is got over by
 the use of divided measuring-rods, the introduction of which does not
 demand any fundamentally new method.


Every description of the scene of an event or of the position of an
object in space is based on the specification of the point on a rigid
body (body of reference) with which that event or object coincides.
This applies not only to scientific description, but also to everyday
life. If I analyse the place specification Trafalgar Square,
London[3] I arrive at the following result. The earth is the rigid
body to which the specification of place refers; Trafalgar Square,
London is a well-defined point, to which a name has been assigned, and
with which the event coincides in space.[4]


 [3]

I have chosen this as being more familiar to the English reader than
the Potzdammer Platz, Berlin, which is referred to in the original.
(R. W. L.)


 [4] It is not necessary here to investigate further the significance
 of the expression coincidence in space. This conception is
 sufficiently obvious to ensure that differences of opinion are
 scarcely likely to arise as to its applicability in practice.


This primitive method of place specification deals only with places on
the surface of rigid bodies, and is dependent on the existence of
points on this surface which are distinguishable from each other. But
we can free ourselves from both of these limitations without altering
the nature of our specification of position. If, for instance, a cloud
is hovering over Trafalgar Square, then we can determine its position
relative to the surface of the earth by erecting a pole perpendicularly
on the Square, so that it reaches the cloud. The length of the pole
measured with the standard measuring-rod, combined with the
specification of the position of the foot of the pole, supplies us with
a complete place specification. On the basis of this illustration, we
are able to see the manner in which a refinement of the conception of
position has been developed.

(_a_) We imagine the rigid body, to which the place specification is
referred, supplemented in such a manner that the object whose position
we require is reached by the completed rigid body.

(_b_) In locating the position of the object, we make use of a number
(here the length of the pole measured with the measuring-rod) instead
of designated points of reference.

(_c_) We speak of the height of the cloud even when the pole which
reaches the cloud has not been erected. By means of optical
observations of the cloud from different positions on the ground, and
taking into account the properties of the propagation of light, we
determine the length of the pole we should have required in order to
reach the cloud.

From this consideration we see that it will be advantageous if, in the
description of position, it should be possible by means of numerical
measures to make ourselves independent of the existence of marked
positions (possessing names) on the rigid body of reference. In the
physics of measurement this is attained by the application of the
Cartesian system of co-ordinates.

This consists of three plane surfaces perpendicular to each other and
rigidly attached to a rigid body. Referred to a system of co-ordinates,
the scene of any event will be determined (for the main part) by the
specification of the lengths of the three perpendiculars or
co-ordinates (_x, y, z_) which can be dropped from the scene of the
event to those three plane surfaces. The lengths of these three
perpendiculars can be determined by a series of manipulations with
rigid measuring-rods performed according to the rules and methods laid
down by Euclidean geometry.

In practice, the rigid surfaces which constitute the system of
co-ordinates are generally not available; furthermore, the magnitudes
of the co-ordinates are not actually determined by constructions with
rigid rods, but by indirect means. If the results of physics and
astronomy are to maintain their clearness, the physical meaning of
specifications of position must always be sought in accordance with the
above considerations.[5]


 [5] A refinement and modification of these views does not become
 necessary until we come to deal with the general theory of relativity,
 treated in the second part of this book.


We thus obtain the following result: Every description of events in
space involves the use of a rigid body to which such events have to be
referred. The resulting relationship takes for granted that the laws of
Euclidean geometry hold for distances; the distance being
represented physically by means of the convention of two marks on a
rigid body.


III.

SPACE AND TIME IN CLASSICAL MECHANICS

The purpose of mechanics is to describe how bodies change their
position in space with time. I should load my conscience with grave
sins against the sacred spirit of lucidity were I to formulate the aims
of mechanics in this way, without serious reflection and detailed
explanations. Let us proceed to disclose these sins.

It is not clear what is to be understood here by position and
space. I stand at the window of a railway carriage which is
travelling uniformly, and drop a stone on the embankment, without
throwing it. Then, disregarding the influence of the air resistance, I
see the stone descend in a straight line. A pedestrian who observes the
misdeed from the footpath notices that the stone falls to earth in a
parabolic curve. I now ask: Do the positions traversed by the stone
lie in reality on a straight line or on a parabola? Moreover, what is
meant here by motion in space? From the considerations of the
previous section the answer is self-evident. In the first place we
entirely shun the vague word space, of which, we must honestly
acknowledge, we cannot form the slightest conception, and we replace it
by motion relative to a practically rigid body of reference. The
positions relative to the body of reference (railway carriage or
embankment) have already been defined in detail in the preceding
section. If instead of body of reference we insert system of
co-ordinates, which is a useful idea for mathematical description, we
are in a position to say: The stone traverses a straight line relative
to a system of co-ordinates rigidly attached to the carriage, but
relative to a system of co-ordinates rigidly attached to the ground
(embankment) it describes a parabola. With the aid of this example it
is clearly seen that there is no such thing as an independently
existing trajectory (lit. path-curve[6], but only a trajectory
relative to a particular body of reference.


 [6] That is, a curve along which the body moves.


In order to have a _complete_ description of the motion, we must
specify how the body alters its position _with time; i.e._ for every
point on the trajectory it must be stated at what time the body is
situated there. These data must be supplemented by such a definition of
time that, in virtue of this definition, these time-values can be
regarded essentially as magnitudes (results of measurements) capable of
observation. If we take our stand on the ground of classical mechanics,
we can satisfy this requirement for our illustration in the following
manner. We imagine two clocks of identical construction; the man at the
railway-carriage window is holding one of them, and the man on the
footpath the other. Each of the observers determines the position on
his own reference-body occupied by the stone at each tick of the clock
he is holding in his hand. In this connection we have not taken account
of the inaccuracy involved by the finiteness of the velocity of
propagation of light. With this and with a second difficulty prevailing
here we shall have to deal in detail later.


IV. THE GALILEIAN SYSTEM OF CO-ORDINATES


As is well known, the fundamental law of the mechanics of
Galilei-Newton, which is known as the _law of inertia_, can be stated
thus: A body removed sufficiently far from other bodies continues in a
state of rest or of uniform motion in a straight line. This law not
only says something about the motion of the bodies, but it also
indicates the reference-bodies or systems of coordinates, permissible
in mechanics, which can be used in mechanical description. The visible
fixed stars are bodies for which the law of inertia certainly holds to
a high degree of approximation. Now if we use a system of co-ordinates
which is rigidly attached to the earth, then, relative to this system,
every fixed star describes a circle of immense radius in the course of
an astronomical day, a result which is opposed to the statement of the
law of inertia. So that if we adhere to this law we must refer these
motions only to systems of coordinates relative to which the fixed
stars do not move in a circle. A system of co-ordinates of which the
state of motion is such that the law of inertia holds relative to it is
called a Galileian system of co-ordinates. The laws of the mechanics
of Galilei-Newton can be regarded as valid only for a Galileian system
of co-ordinates.


V.

THE PRINCIPLE OF RELATIVITY (IN THE RESTRICTED SENSE)

In order to attain the greatest possible clearness, let us return to
our example of the railway carriage supposed to be travelling
uniformly. We call its motion a uniform translation (uniform because
it is of constant velocity and direction, translation because
although the carriage changes its position relative to the embankment
yet it does not rotate in so doing). Let us imagine a raven flying
through the air in such a manner that its motion, as observed from the
embankment, is uniform and in a straight line. If we were to observe
the flying raven from the moving railway carriage. we should find that
the motion of the raven would be one of different velocity and
direction, but that it would still be uniform and in a straight line.
Expressed in an abstract manner we may say: If a mass _m_ is moving
uniformly in a straight line with respect to a co-ordinate system _K_,
then it will also be moving uniformly and in a straight line relative
to a second co-ordinate system _K_ provided that the latter is
executing a uniform translatory motion with respect to _K_. In
accordance with the discussion contained in the preceding section, it
follows that:

If _K_ is a Galileian co-ordinate system. then every other co-ordinate
system _K_ is a Galileian one, when, in relation to _K_, it is in a
condition of uniform motion of translation. Relative to _K_ the
mechanical laws of Galilei-Newton hold good exactly as they do with
respect to _K_.

We advance a step farther in our generalisation when we express the
tenet thus: If, relative to _K_, _K_ is a uniformly moving co-ordinate
system devoid of rotation, then natural phenomena run their course with
respect to _K_ according to exactly the same general laws as with
respect to _K_. This statement is called the _principle of relativity_
(in the restricted sense).

As long as one was convinced that all natural phenomena were capableof
representation with the help of classical mechanics, there was no need
to doubt the validity of this principle of relativity. But in view of
the more recent development of electrodynamics and optics it became
more and more evident that classical mechanics affords an insufficient
foundation for the physical description of all natural phenomena. At
this juncture the question of the validity of the principle of
relativity became ripe for discussion, and it did not appear impossible
that the answer to this question might be in the negative.

Nevertheless, there are two general facts which at the outset speak
very much in favour of the validity of the principle of relativity.
Even though classical mechanics does not supply us with a sufficiently
broad basis for the theoretical presentation of all physical phenomena,
still we must grant it a considerable measure of truth, since it
supplies us with the actual motions of the heavenly bodies with a
delicacy of detail little short of wonderful. The principle of
relativity must therefore apply with great accuracy in the domain of
_mechanics_. But that a principle of such broad generality should hold
with such exactness in one domain of phenomena, and yet should be
invalid for another, is _a priori_ not very probable.

We now proceed to the second argument, to which, moreover, we shall
return later. If the principle of relativity (in the restricted sense)
does not hold, then the Galileian co-ordinate systems _K, K, K_,
etc., which are moving uniformly relative to each other, will not be
_equivalent_ for the description of natural phenomena. In this case we
should be constrained to believe that natural laws are capable of being
formulated in a particularly simple manner, and of course only on
condition that, from amongst all possible Galileian co-ordinate
systems, we should have chosen _one_ (_K0_) of a particular state of
motion as our body of reference. We should then be justified (because
of its merits for the description of natural phenomena) in calling this
system absolutely at rest, and all other Galileian systems _K_ in
motion. If, for instance, our embankment were the system _K0_ then our
railway carriage would be a system _K_, relative to which less simple
laws would hold than with respect to _K0_. This diminished simplicity
would be due to the fact that the carriage _K_ would be in motion
(_i.e._ really)with respect to _K0_. In the general laws of nature
which have been formulated with reference to _K_, the magnitude and
direction of the velocity of the carriage would necessarily play a
part. We should expect, for instance, that the note emitted by an
organpipe placed with its axis parallel to the direction of travel
would be different from that emitted if the axis of the pipe were
placed perpendicular to this direction.

Now in virtue of its motion in an orbit round the sun, our earth is
comparable with a railway carriage travelling with a velocity of about
30 kilometres per second. If the principle of relativity were not valid
we should therefore expect that the direction of motion of the earth at
any moment would enter into the laws of nature, and also that physical
systems in their behaviour would be dependent on the orientation in
space with respect to the earth. For owing to the alteration in
direction of the velocity of revolution of the earth in the course of a
year, the earth cannot be at rest relative to the hypothetical system
_K0_ throughout the whole year. However, the most careful observations
have never revealed such anisotropic properties in terrestrial physical
space, _i.e._ a physical non-equivalence of different directions. This
is very powerful argument in favour of the principle of relativity.


VI.

THE THEOREM OF THE ADDITION OF VELOCITIES EMPLOYED IN CLASSICAL
MECHANICS

Let us suppose our old friend the railway carriage to be travelling
along the rails with a constant velocity _v_, and that a man traverses
the length of the carriage in the direction of travel with a velocity
_w_. How quickly or, in other words, with what velocity _W_ does the
man advance relative to the embankment during the process? The only
possible answer seems to result from the following consideration: If
the man were to stand still for a second, he would advance relative to
the embankment through a distance _v_ equal numerically to the velocity
of the carriage. As a consequence of his walking, however, he traverses
an additional distance w relative to the carriage, and hence also
relative to the embankment, in this second, the distance w being
numerically equal to the velocity with which he is walking. Thus in
total he covers the distance _W = v + w_ relative to the embankment in
the second considered. We shall see later that this result, which
expresses the theorem of the addition of velocities employed in
classical mechanics, cannot be maintained; in other words, the law that
we have just written down does not hold in reality. For the time being,
however, we shall assume its correctness.


VII.

THE APPARENT INCOMPATIBILITY OF THE LAW OF PROPAGATION OF LIGHT WITH
THE PRINCIPLE OF RELATIVITY

There is hardly a simpler law in physics than that according to which
light is propagated in empty space. Every child at school knows, or
believes he knows, that this propagation takes place in straight lines
with a velocity _c_ = 300,000 km./sec. At all events we know with great
exactness that this velocity is the same for all colours, because if
this were not the case, the minimum of emission would not be observed
simultaneously for different colours during the eclipse of a fixed star
by its dark neighbour. By means of similar considerations based on
observations of double stars, the Dutch astronomer De Sitter was also
able to show that the velocity of propagation of light cannot depend on
the velocity of motion of the body emitting the light. The assumption
that this velocity of propagation is dependent on the direction in
space is in itself improbable.

In short, let us assume that the simple law of the constancy of the
velocity of light _c_ (in vacuum) is justifiably believed by the child
at school. Who would imagine that this simple law has plunged the
conscientiously thoughtful physicist into the greatest intellectual
difficulties? Let us consider how these difficulties arise.

Of course we must refer the process of the propagation of light (and
indeed every other process) to a rigid reference-body (co-ordinate
system). As such a system let us again choose our embankment. We shall
imagine the air above it to have been removed. If a ray of light be
sent along the embankment, we see from the above that the tip of the
ray will be transmitted with the velocity _c_ relative to the
embankment. Now let us suppose that our railway carriage is again
travelling along the railway lines with the velocity _v_, and that its
direction is the same as that of the ray of light, but its velocity of
course much less. Let us inquire about the velocity of propagation of
the ray of light relative to the carriage. It is obvious that we can
here apply the consideration of the previous section, since the ray of
light plays the part of the man walking along relatively to the
carriage. The velocity _W_ of the man relative to the embankment is
here replaced by the velocity of light relative to the embankment. _w_
is the required velocity of light with respect to the carriage, and we
have

_w = c  v._

The velocity of propagation ot a ray of light relative to the carriage
thus comes out smaller than _c_.

But this result comes into conflict with the principle of relativity
set forth in Section V. For, like every other general law of nature,
the law of the transmission of light _in vacuo_ [in vacuum] must,
according to the principle of relativity, be the same for the railway
carriage as reference-body as when the rails are the body of reference.
But, from our above consideration, this would appear to be impossible.
If every ray of light is propagated relative to the embankment with the
velocity _c_, then for this reason it would appear that another law of
propagation of light must necessarily hold with respect to the
carriagea result contradictory to the principle of relativity.

In view of this dilemma there appears to be nothing else for it than to
abandon either the principle of relativity or the simple law of the
propagation of light _in vacuo_. Those of you who have carefully
followed the preceding discussion are almost sure to expect that we
should retain the principle of relativity, which appeals so
convincingly to the intellect because it is so natural and simple. The
law of the propagation of light _in vacuo_ would then have to be
replaced by a more complicated law conformable to the principle of
relativity. The development of theoretical physics shows, however, that
we cannot pursue this course. The epoch-making theoretical
investigations of H. A. Lorentz on the electrodynamical and optical
phenomena connected with moving bodies show that experience in this
domain leads conclusively to a theory of electromagnetic phenomena, of
which the law of the constancy of the velocity of light in vacuo is a
necessary consequence. Prominent theoretical physicists were therefore
more inclined to reject the principle of relativity, in spite of the
fact that no empirical data had been found which were contradictory to
this principle.

At this juncture the theory of relativity entered the arena. As a
result of an analysis of the physical conceptions of time and space, it
became evident that _in reality there is not the least incompatibilitiy
between the principle of relativity and the law of propagation of
light_, and that by systematically holding fast to both these laws a
logically rigid theory could be arrived at. This theory has been called
the _special theory of relativity_ to distinguish it from the extended
theory, with which we shall deal later. In the following pages we shall
present the fundamental ideas of the special theory of relativity.


VIII.

ON THE IDEA OF TIME IN PHYSICS

Lightning has struck the rails on our railway embankment at two places
_A_ and _B_ far distant from each other. I make the additional
assertion that these two lightning flashes occurred simultaneously. If
I ask you whether there is sense in this statement, you will answer my
question with a decided Yes. But if I now approach you with the
request to explain to me the sense of the statement more precisely, you
find after some consideration that the answer to this question is not
so easy as it appears at first sight.

After some time perhaps the following answer would occur to you: The
significance of the statement is clear in itself and needs no further
explanation; of course it would require some consideration if I were to
be commissioned to determine by observations whether in the actual case
the two events took place simultaneously or not. I cannot be satisfied
with this answer for the following reason. Supposing that as a result
of ingenious considerations an able meteorologist were to discover that
the lightning must always strike the places _A_ and _B_ simultaneously,
then we should be faced with the task of testing whether or not this
theoretical result is in accordance with the reality. We encounter the
same difficulty with all physical statements in which the conception
simultaneous plays a part. The concept does not exist for the
physicist until he has the possibility of discovering whether or not it
is fulfilled in an actual case. We thus require a definition of
simultaneity such that this definition supplies us with the method by
means of which, in the present case, he can decide by experiment
whether or not both the lightning strokes occurred simultaneously. As
long as this requirement is not satisfied, I allow myself to be
deceived as a physicist (and of course the same applies if I am not a
physicist), when I imagine that I am able to attach a meaning to the
statement of simultaneity. (I would ask the reader not to proceed
farther until he is fully convinced on this point.)

After thinking the matter over for some time you then offer the
following suggestion with which to test simultaneity. By measuring
along the rails, the connecting line _AB_ should be measured up and an
observer placed at the mid-point M of the distance _AB_. This observer
should be supplied with an arrangement (_e.g._ two mirrors inclined at
90) which allows him visually to observe both places _A_ and _B_ at
the same time. If the observer perceives the two flashes of lightning
at the same time, then they are simultaneous.

I am very pleased with this suggestion, but for all that I cannot
regard the matter as quite settled, because I feel constrained to raise
the following objection: Your definition would certainly be right, if
only I knew that the light by means of which the observer at _M_
perceives the lightning flashes travels along the length _A_  _M_ with
the same velocity as along the length _B_  _M_. But an examination of
this supposition would only be possible if we already had at our
disposal the means of measuring time. It would thus appear as though we
were moving here in a logical circle.

After further consideration you cast a somewhat disdainful glance at
meand rightly soand you declare: I maintain my previous definition
nevertheless, because in reality it assumes absolutely nothing about
light. There is only _one_ demand to be made of the definition of
simultaneity, namely, that in every real case it must supply us with an
empirical decision as to whether or not the conception that has to be
defined is fulfilled. That my definition satisfies this demand is
indisputable. That light requires the same time to traverse the path
_A_  _M_ as for the path _B_  _M_ is in reality neither a
_supposition nor a hypothesis_ about the physical nature of light, but
a _stipulation_ which I can make of my own freewill in order to arrive
at a definition of simultaneity.

It is clear that this definition can be used to give an exact meaning
not only to _two_ events, but to as many events as we care to choose,
and independently of the positions of the scenes of the events with
respect to the body of reference[7] (here the railway embankment). We
are thus led also to a definition of time in physics. For this
purpose we suppose that clocks of identical construction are placed at
the points _A, B_ and _C_ of the railway line (co-ordinate system) and
that they are set in such a manner that the positions of their pointers
are simultaneously (in the above sense) the same. Under these
conditions we understand by the time of an event the reading
(position of the hands) of that one of these clocks which is in the
immediate vicinity (in space) of the event. In this manner a time-value
is associated with every event which is essentially capable of
observation.


 [7] We suppose further that, when three events _A, B_ and _C_ occur in
 different places in such a manner that, if _A_ is simultaneous with
 _B_, and _B_ is simultaneous with _C_ (simultaneous in the sense of
 the above definition), then the criterion for the simultaneity of the
 pair of events _A, C_ is also satisfied. This assumption is a physical
 hypothesis about the law of propagation of light; it must certainly be
 fulfilled if we are to maintain the law of the constancy of the
 velocity of light _in vacuo_.


This stipulation contains a further physical hypothesis, the validity
of which will hardly be doubted without empirical evidence to the
contrary. It has been assumed that all these clocks _go at the same
rate_ if they are of identical construction. Stated more exactly: When
two clocks arranged at rest in different places of a reference-body are
set in such a manner that a _particular_ position of the pointers of
the one clock is _simultaneous_ (in the above sense) with the _same_
position, of the pointers of the other clock, then identical settings
are always simultaneous (in the sense of the above definition).


IX.

THE RELATIVITY OF SIMULTANEITY

Up to now our considerations have been referred to a particular body of
reference, which we have styled a railway embankment. We suppose a
very long train travelling along the rails with the constant velocity v
and in the direction indicated in Fig 1. People travelling in this
train will with a vantage view the train as a rigid reference-body
(co-ordinate system); they regard all events in reference to the train.
Then every event which takes place along the line also takes place at a
particular point of the train. Also the definition of simultaneity can
be given relative to the train in exactly the same way as with respect
to the embankment. As a natural consequence, however, the following
question arises:

image001


Are two events (_e.g._ the two strokes of lightning _A_ and _B_) which
are simultaneous _with reference to the railway embankment_ also
simultaneous _relatively to the train?_ We shall show directly that the
answer must be in the negative.

When we say that the lightning strokes _A_ and _B_ are simultaneous
with respect to be embankment, we mean: the rays of light emitted at
the places _A_ and _B_, where the lightning occurs, meet each other at
the mid-point _M_ of the length _A_  _B_ of the embankment. But the
events _A_ and _B_ also correspond to positions _A_ and _B_ on the
train. Let _M_ be the mid-point of the distance _A_  _B_ on the
travelling train. Just when the flashes (as judged from the embankment)
of lightning occur, this point _M_ naturally coincides with the point
_M_ but it moves towards the right in the diagram with the velocity v
of the train. If an observer sitting in the position _M_ in the train
did not possess this velocity, then he would remain permanently at M,
and the light rays emitted by the flashes of lightning _A_ and _B_
would reach him simultaneously, _i.e._ they would meet just where he is
situated. Now in reality (considered with reference to the railway
embankment) he is hastening towards the beam of light coming from _B_,
whilst he is riding on ahead of the beam of light coming from _A_.
Hence the observer will see the beam of light emitted from _B_ earlier
than he will see that emitted from _A_. Observers who take the railway
train as their reference-body must therefore come to the conclusion
that the lightning flash _B_ took place earlier than the lightning
flash _A_. We thus arrive at the important result:

Events which are simultaneous with reference to the embankment are not
simultaneous with respect to the train, and _vice versa_ (relativity of
simultaneity). Every reference-body (co-ordinate system) has its own
particular time; unless we are told the reference-body to which the
statement of time refers, there is no meaning in a statement of the
time of an event.

Now before the advent of the theory of relativity it had always tacitly
been assumed in physics that the statement of time had an absolute
significance, _i.e._ that it is independent of the state of motion of
the body of reference. But we have just seen that this assumption is
incompatible with the most natural definition of simultaneity; if we
discard this assumption, then the conflict between the law of the
propagation of light _in vacuo_ and the principle of relativity
(developed in Section VII) disappears.

We were led to that conflict by the considerations of Section VI, which
are now no longer tenable. In that section we concluded that the man in
the carriage, who traverses the distance _w per second_ relative to the
carriage, traverses the same distance also with respect to the
embankment _in each second_ of time. But, according to the foregoing
considerations, the time required by a particular occurrence with
respect to the carriage must not be considered equal to the duration of
the same occurrence as judged from the embankment (as reference-body).
Hence it cannot be contended that the man in walking travels the
distance _w_ relative to the railway line in a time which is equal to
one second as judged from the embankment.

Moreover, the considerations of Section VI are based on yet a second
assumption, which, in the light of a strict consideration, appears to
be arbitrary, although it was always tacitly made even before the
introduction of the theory of relativity.


X.

ON THE RELATIVITY OF THE CONCEPTION OF DISTANCE

Let us consider two particular points on the train [8] travelling along
the embankment with the velocity _v_, and inquire as to their distance
apart. We already know that it is necessary to have a body of reference
for the measurement of a distance, with respect to which body the
distance can be measured up. It is the simplest plan to use the train
itself as reference-body (co-ordinate system). An observer in the train
measures the interval by marking off his measuring-rod in a straight
line (_e.g._ along the floor of the carriage) as many times as is
necessary to take him from the one marked point to the other. Then the
number which tells us how often the rod has to be laid down is the
required distance.


 [8] _e.g._ the middle of the first and of the hundredth carriage.


It is a different matter when the distance has to be judged from the
railway line. Here the following method suggests itself. If we call
_A_ and _B_ the two points on the train whose distance apart is
required, then both of these points are moving with the velocity v
along the embankment. In the first place we require to determine the
points _A_ and _B_ of the embankment which are just being passed by the
two points _A_ and _B_ at a particular time tjudged from the
embankment. These points _A_ and _B_ of the embankment can be
determined by applying the definition of time given in Section VIII.
The distance between these points A and B is then measured by repeated
application of the measuring-rod along the embankment.

_A priori_ it is by no means certain that this last measurement will
supply us with the same result as the first. Thus the length of the
train as measured from the embankment may be different from that
obtained by measuring in the train itself. This circumstance leads us
to a second objection which must be raised against the apparently
obvious consideration of Section VI. Namely, if the man in the carriage
covers the distance _w_ in a unit of time_measured from the
train_,then this distance_as measured from the embankment_ is not
necessarily also equal to _w_.


XI.

THE LORENTZ TRANSFORMATION

The results of the last three sections show that the apparent
incompatibility of the law of propagation of light with the principle
of relativity (Section VII) has been derived by means of a
consideration which borrowed two unjustifiable hypotheses from
classical mechanics; these are as follows:

(1) The time-interval (time) between two events is independent of the
condition of motion of the body of reference.


(2) The space-interval (distance) between two points of a rigid body is
independent of the condition of motion of the body of reference.


If we drop these hypotheses, then the dilemma of Section VII
disappears, because the theorem of the addition of velocities derived
in Section VI becomes invalid. The possibility presents itself that the
law of the propagation of light _in vacuo_ may be compatible with the
principle of relativity, and the question arises: How have we to modify
the considerations of Section VI in order to remove the apparent
disagreement between these two fundamental results of experience? This
question leads to a general one. In the discussion of Section VI we
have to do with places and times relative both to the train and to the
embankment. How are we to find the place and time of an event in
relation to the train, when we know the place and time of the event
with respect to the railway embankment? Is there a thinkable answer to
this question of such a nature that the law of transmission of light
_in vacuo_ does not contradict the principle of relativity? In other
words: Can we conceive of a relation between place and time of the
individual events relative to both reference-bodies, such that every
ray of light possesses the velocity of transmission _c_ relative to the
embankment and relative to the train? This question leads to a quite
definite positive answer, and to a perfectly definite transformation
law for the space-time magnitudes of an event when changing over from
one body of reference to another.

Before we deal with this, we shall introduce the following incidental
consideration. Up to the present we have only considered events taking
place along the embankment, which had mathematically to assume the
function of a straight line. In the manner indicated in Section II we
can imagine this reference-body supplemented laterally and in a
vertical direction by means of a framework of rods, so that an event
which takes place anywhere can be localised with reference to this
framework. Similarly, we can imagine the train travelling with the
velocity _v_ to be continued across the whole of space, so that every
event, no matter how far off it may be, could also be localised with
respect to the second framework. Without committing any fundamental
error, we can disregard the fact that in reality these frameworks would
continually interfere with each other, owing to the impenetrability of
solid bodies. In every such framework we imagine three surfaces
perpendicular to each other marked out, and designated as co-ordinate
planes (co-ordinate system). A co-ordinate system _K_ then
corresponds to the embankment, and a co-ordinate system _K_ to the
train. An event, wherever it may have taken place, would be fixed in
space with respect to _K_ by the three perpendiculars _x, y, z_ on the
co-ordinate planes, and with regard to time by a time value _t_.
Relative to _K, the same event_ would be fixed in respect of space and
time by corresponding values _x, y, z, t_, which of course are not
identical with _x, y, z, t_. It has already been set forth in detail
how these magnitudes are to be regarded as results of physical
measurements.

image002


Obviously our problem can be exactly formulated in the following
manner. What are the values _x, y, z, t_, of an event with respect
to _K_, when the magnitudes _x, y, z, t_, of the same event with
respect to _K_ are given? The relations must be so chosen that the law
of the transmission of light in vacuo is satisfied for one and the same
ray of light (and of course for every ray) with respect to _K_ and
_K_. For the relative orientation in space of the co-ordinate systems
indicated in the diagram (Fig. 2), this problem is solved by means of
the equations:

image003


_y_ = _y_

_z_ = _z_


image004


This system of equations is known as the Lorentz transformation.[9]


 [9] A simple derivation of the Lorentz transformation is given in
 Appendix I.


If in place of the law of transmission of light we had taken as our
basis the tacit assumptions of the older mechanics as to the absolute
character of times and lengths, then instead of the above we should
have obtained the following equations:

_x_ = _x_  _vt_


_y_ = _y_


_z_ = _z_


_t_ = _t_


This system of equations is often termed the Galilei transformation.
The Galilei transformation can be obtained from the Lorentz
transformation by substituting an infinitely large value for the
velocity of light _c_ in the latter transformation.

Aided by the following illustration, we can readily see that, in
accordance with the Lorentz transformation, the law of the transmission
of light _in vacuo_ is satisfied both for the reference-body _K_ and
for the reference-body _K_. A light-signal is sent along the positive
_x_-axis, and this light-stimulus advances in accordance with the
equation

_x_ = _ct_,


_i.e._ with the velocity _c_. According to the equations of the Lorentz
transformation, this simple relation between _x_ and _t_ involves a
relation between _x_ and _t_. In point of fact, if we substitute for
_x_ the value _ct_ in the first and fourth equations of the Lorentz
transformation, we obtain:

image005


from which, by division, the expression

_x_ = _ct_


immediately follows. If referred to the system _K_, the propagation of
light takes place according to this equation. We thus see that the
velocity of transmission relative to the reference-body _K_ is also
equal to _c_. The same result is obtained for rays of light advancing
in any other direction whatsoever. Of cause this is not surprising,
since the equations of the Lorentz transformation were derived
conformably to this point of view.


XII.

THE BEHAVIOUR OF MEASURING-RODS AND CLOCKS IN MOTION

Place a metre-rod in the _x_-axis of _K_ in such a manner that one
end (the beginning) coincides with the point _x_ = 0 whilst the other
end (the end of the rod) coincides with the point _x_ = 1. What is the
length of the metre-rod relatively to the system _K_? In order to learn
this, we need only ask where the beginning of the rod and the end of
the rod lie with respect to _K_ at a particular time _t_ of the system
_K_. By means of the first equation of the Lorentz transformation the
values of these two points at the time _t_ = 0 can be shown to be

image006


the distance between the points being

image007


But the metre-rod is moving with the velocity _v_ relative to _K_. It
therefore follows that the length of a rigid metre-rod moving in the
direction of its length with a velocity _v_ is

image008


of a metre. The rigid rod is thus shorter when in motion than when at
rest, and the more quickly it is moving, the shorter is the rod. For
the velocity _v_ = _c_ we should have

image009


and for still greater velocities the square-root becomes imaginary.
From this we conclude that in the theory of relativity the velocity _c_
plays the part of a limiting velocity, which can neither be reached nor
exceeded by any real body.

Of course this feature of the velocity _c_ as a limiting velocity also
clearly follows from the equations of the Lorentz transformation, for
these became meaningless if we choose values of _v_ greater than _c_.

If, on the contrary, we had considered a metre-rod at rest in the
_x_-axis with respect to _K_, then we should have found that the length
of the rod as judged from _K_ would have been

image010


this is quite in accordance with the principle of relativity which
forms the basis of our considerations.

_A priori_ it is quite clear that we must be able to learn something
about the physical behaviour of measuring-rods and clocks from the
equations of transformation, for the magnitudes _z, y, x, t_, are
nothing more nor less than the results of measurements obtainable by
means of measuring-rods and clocks. If we had based our considerations
on the Galileian transformation we should not have obtained a
contraction of the rod as a consequence of its motion.

Let us now consider a seconds-clock which is permanently situated at
the origin (_x_ = 0) of _K_. _t_ = 0 and _t_ = 1 are two successive
ticks of this clock. The first and fourth equations of the Lorentz
transformation give for these two ticks:

_t_ = 0

and

image011


As judged from _K_, the clock is moving with the velocity _v_; as
judged from this reference-body, the time which elapses between two
strokes of the clock is not one second, but

image012


seconds, _i.e._ a somewhat larger time. As a consequence of its motion
the clock goes more slowly than when at rest. Here also the velocity
_c_ plays the part of an unattainable limiting velocity.


XIII.

THEOREM OF THE ADDITION OF VELOCITIES. THE EXPERIMENT OF FIZEAU

Now in practice we can move clocks and measuring-rods only with
velocities that are small compared with the velocity of light; hence we
shall hardly be able to compare the results of the previous section
directly with the reality. But, on the other hand, these results must
strike you as being very singular, and for that reason I shall now draw
another conclusion from the theory, one which can easily be derived
from the foregoing considerations, and which has been most elegantly
confirmed by experiment.

In Section VI we derived the theorem of the addition of velocities in
one direction in the form which also results from the hypotheses of
classical mechanics. This theorem can also be deduced readily from the
Galilei transformation (Section XI). In place of the man walking inside
the carriage, we introduce a point moving relatively to the co-ordinate
system _K_ in accordance with the equation

_x_ = _wt_

By means of the first and fourth equations of the Galilei
transformation we can express _x_ and _t_ in terms of _x_ and _t_,
and we then obtain

_x_ = (_v_ + _w_)_t_

This equation expresses nothing else than the law of motion of the
point with reference to the system _K_ (of the man with reference to
the embankment). We denote this velocity by the symbol _W_, and we then
obtain, as in Section VI,

_W_ = _v_ + _w_ . . . . . . . (A).

But we can carry out this consideration just as well on the basis of
the theory of relativity. In the equation

_x_ = _wt_

we must then express _x_ and _t_ in terms of _x_ and _t_, making use
of the first and fourth equations of the _Lorentz transformation_.
Instead of the equation (A) we then obtain the equation

image013


which corresponds to the theorem of addition for velocities in one
direction according to the theory of relativity. The question now
arises as to which of these two theorems is the better in accord with
experience. On this point we are enlightened by a most important
experiment which the brilliant physicist Fizeau performed more than
half a century ago, and which has been repeated since then by some of
the best experimental physicists, so that there can be no doubt about
its result. The experiment is concerned with the following question.
Light travels in a motionless liquid with a particular velocity _w_.
How quickly does it travel in the direction of the arrow in the tube
_T_ (see the accompanying diagram, Fig. 3) when the liquid above
mentioned is flowing through the tube with a velocity _v_?

image014


In accordance with the principle of relativity we shall certainly have
to take for granted that the propagation of light always takes place
with the same velocity _w with respect to the liquid_, whether the
latter is in motion with reference to other bodies or not. The velocity
of light relative to the liquid and the velocity of the latter relative
to the tube are thus known, and we require the velocity of light
relative to the tube.

It is clear that we have the problem of Section VI again before us. The
tube plays the part of the railway embankment or of the co-ordinate
system _K_, the liquid plays the part of the carriage or of the
co-ordinate system _K_, and finally, the light plays the part of the
man walking along the carriage, or of the moving point in the present
section. If we denote the velocity of the light relative to the tube by
_W_, then this is given by the equation (A) or (B), according as the
Galilei transformation or the Lorentz transformation corresponds to the
facts. Experiment[10] decides in favour of equation (B) derived from
the theory of relativity, and the agreement is, indeed, very exact.
According to recent and most excellent measurements by Zeeman, the
influence of the velocity of flow _v_ on the propagation of light is
represented by formula (B) to within one per cent.


 [10] Fizeau found


image015


where


image016


is the index of refraction of the liquid. On the other hand, owing to
the smallness of


image017


as compared with 1, we can replace (B) in the first place by


image018


or to the same order of approximation by


image019


which agrees with Fizeaus result.


Nevertheless we must now draw attention to the fact that a theory of
this phenomenon was given by H. A. Lorentz long before the statement of
the theory of relativity. This theory was of a purely electrodynamical
nature, and was obtained by the use of particular hypotheses as to the
electromagnetic structure of matter. This circumstance, however, does
not in the least diminish the conclusiveness of the experiment as a
crucial test in favour of the theory of relativity, for the
electrodynamics of Maxwell-Lorentz, on which the original theory was
based, in no way opposes the theory of relativity. Rather has the
latter been developed trom electrodynamics as an astoundingly simple
combination and generalisation of the hypotheses, formerly independent
of each other, on which electrodynamics was built.


XIV.

THE HEURISTIC VALUE OF THE THEORY OF RELATIVITY

Our train of thought in the foregoing pages can be epitomised in the
following manner. Experience has led to the conviction that, on the one
hand, the principle of relativity holds true and that on the other hand
the velocity of transmission of light _in vacuo_ has to be considered
equal to a constant _c_. By uniting these two postulates we obtained
the law of transformation for the rectangular co-ordinates _x, y, z_
and the time _t_ of the events which constitute the processes of
nature. In this connection we did not obtain the Galilei
transformation, but, differing from classical mechanics, the _Lorentz
transformation_.

The law of transmission of light, the acceptance of which is justified
by our actual knowledge, played an important part in this process of
thought. Once in possession of the Lorentz transformation, however, we
can combine this with the principle of relativity, and sum up the
theory thus:

Every general law of nature must be so constituted that it is
transformed into a law of exactly the same form when, instead of the
space-time variables _x, y, z, t_ of the original coordinate system
_K_, we introduce new space-time variables _x, y, z, t_ of a
co-ordinate system _K_. In this connection the relation between the
ordinary and the accented magnitudes is given by the Lorentz
transformation. Or in brief: General laws of nature are co-variant with
respect to Lorentz transformations.

This is a definite mathematical condition that the theory of relativity
demands of a natural law, and in virtue of this, the theory becomes a
valuable heuristic aid in the search for general laws of nature. If a
general law of nature were to be found which did not satisfy this
condition, then at least one of the two fundamental assumptions of the
theory would have been disproved. Let us now examine what general
results the latter theory has hitherto evinced.


XV.

GENERAL RESULTS OF THE THEORY

It is clear from our previous considerations that the (special) theory
of relativity has grown out of electrodynamics and optics. In these
fields it has not appreciably altered the predictions of theory, but it
has considerably simplified the theoretical structure, _i.e._ the
derivation of laws, andwhat is incomparably more importantit has
considerably reduced the number of independent hypothese forming the
basis of theory. The special theory of relativity has rendered the
Maxwell-Lorentz theory so plausible, that the latter would have been
generally accepted by physicists even if experiment had decided less
unequivocally in its favour.

Classical mechanics required to be modified before it could come into
line with the demands of the special theory of relativity. For the main
part, however, this modification affects only the laws for rapid
motions, in which the velocities of matter _v_ are not very small as
compared with the velocity of light. We have experience of such rapid
motions only in the case of electrons and ions; for other motions the
variations from the laws of classical mechanics are too small to make
themselves evident in practice. We shall not consider the motion of
stars until we come to speak of the general theory of relativity. In
accordance with the theory of relativity the kinetic energy of a
material point of mass _m_ is no longer given by the well-known
expression

image020


but by the expression

image021


This expression approaches infinity as the velocity _v_ approaches the
velocity of light _c_. The velocity must therefore always remain less
than _c_, however great may be the energies used to produce the
acceleration. If we develop the expression for the kinetic energy in
the form of a series, we obtain

image022


When

image023


is small compared with unity, the third of these terms is always small
in comparison with the second, which last is alone considered in
classical mechanics. The first term _mc_2 does not contain the
velocity, and requires no consideration if we are only dealing with the
question as to how the energy of a point-mass; depends on the velocity.
We shall speak of its essential significance later.

The most important result of a general character to which the special
theory of relativity has led is concerned with the conception of mass.
Before the advent of relativity, physics recognised two conservation
laws of fundamental importance, namely, the law of the conservation of
energy and the law of the conservation of mass these two fundamental
laws appeared to be quite independent of each other. By means of the
theory of relativity they have been united into one law. We shall now
briefly consider how this unification came about, and what meaning is
to be attached to it.

The principle of relativity requires that the law of the conservation
of energy should hold not only with reference to a co-ordinate system
_K_, but also with respect to every co-ordinate system _K_ which is in
a state of uniform motion of translation relative to _K_, or, briefly,
relative to every Galileian system of co-ordinates. In contrast to
classical mechanics; the Lorentz transformation is the deciding factor
in the transition from one such system to another.

By means of comparatively simple considerations we are led to draw the
following conclusion from these premises, in conjunction with the
fundamental equations of the electrodynamics of Maxwell: A body moving
with the velocity _v_, which absorbs[11] an amount of energy _E_0 in
the form of radiation without suffering an alteration in velocity in
the process, has, as a consequence, its energy increased by an amount

image024



 [11] _E_0 is the energy taken up, as judged from a co-ordinate system
 moving with the body.


In consideration of the expression given above for the kinetic energy
of the body, the required energy of the body comes out to be

image025


Thus the body has the same energy as a body of mass

image026


moving with the velocity _v_. Hence we can say: If a body takes up an
amount of energy _E_0, then its inertial mass increases by an amount

image027


the inertial mass of a body is not a constant but varies according to
the change in the energy of the body. The inertial mass of a system of
bodies can even be regarded as a measure of its energy. The law of the
conservation of the mass of a system becomes identical with the law of
the conservation of energy, and is only valid provided that the system
neither takes up nor sends out energy. Writing the expression for the
energy in the form

image028


we see that the term _mc_2, which has hitherto attracted our attention,
is nothing else than the energy possessed by the body[12] before it
absorbed the energy _E_0.


 [12] As judged from a co-ordinate system moving with the body.


A direct comparison of this relation with experiment is not possible at
the present time (1920; see[Note], p. 48), owing to the fact that the
changes in energy _E_0 to which we can subject a system are not large
enough to make themselves perceptible as a change in the inertial mass
of the system.

image027


is too small in comparison with the mass _m_, which was present before
the alteration of the energy. It is owing to this circumstance that
classical mechanics was able to establish successfully the conservation
of mass as a law of independent validity.


 [Note] The equation E = mc2 has been thoroughly proved time and again
 since this time.


Let me add a final remark of a fundamental nature. The success of the
Faraday-Maxwell interpretation of electromagnetic action at a distance
resulted in physicists becoming convinced that there are no such things
as instantaneous actions at a distance (not involving an intermediary
medium) of the type of Newtons law of gravitation.

According to the theory of relativity, action at a distance with the
velocity of light always takes the place of instantaneous action at a
distance or of action at a distance with an infinite velocity of
transmission. This is connected with the fact that the velocity _c_
plays a fundamental role in this theory. In Part II we shall see in
what way this result becomes modified in the general theory of
relativity.


XVI.

EXPERIENCE AND THE SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY

To what extent is the special theory of relativity supported by
experience? This question is not easily answered for the reason already
mentioned in connection with the fundamental experiment of Fizeau. The
special theory of relativity has crystallised out from the
Maxwell-Lorentz theory of electromagnetic phenomena. Thus all facts of
experience which support the electromagnetic theory also support the
theory of relativity. As being of particular importance, I mention here
the fact that the theory of relativity enables us to predict the
effects produced on the light reaching us from the fixed stars. These
results are obtained in an exceedingly simple manner, and the effects
indicated, which are due to the relative motion of the earth with
reference to those fixed stars are found to be in accord with
experience. We refer to the yearly movement of the apparent position of
the fixed stars resulting from the motion of the earth round the sun
(aberration), and to the influence of the radial components of the
relative motions of the fixed stars with respect to the earth on the
colour of the light reaching us from them. The latter effect manifests
itself in a slight displacement of the spectral lines of the light
transmitted to us from a fixed star, as compared with the position of
the same spectral lines when they are produced by a terrestrial source
of light (Doppler principle). The experimental arguments in favour of
the Maxwell-Lorentz theory, which are at the same time arguments in
favour of the theory of relativity, are too numerous to be set forth
here. In reality they limit the theoretical possibilities to such an
extent, that no other theory than that of Maxwell and Lorentz has been
able to hold its own when tested by experience.

But there are two classes of experimental facts hitherto obtained which
can be represented in the Maxwell-Lorentz theory only by the
introduction of an auxiliary hypothesis, which in itself_i.e._ without
making use of the theory of relativityappears extraneous.

It is known that cathode rays and the so-called -rays emitted by
radioactive substances consist of negatively electrified particles
(electrons) of very small inertia and large velocity. By examining the
deflection of these rays under the influence of electric and magnetic
fields, we can study the law of motion of these particles very exactly.

In the theoretical treatment of these electrons, we are faced with the
difficulty that electrodynamic theory of itself is unable to give an
account of their nature. For since electrical masses of one sign repel
each other, the negative electrical masses constituting the electron
would necessarily be scattered under the influence of their mutual
repulsions, unless there are forces of another kind operating between
them, the nature of which has hitherto remained obscure to us.[13] If
we now assume that the relative distances between the electrical masses
constituting the electron remain unchanged during the motion of the
electron (rigid connection in the sense of classical mechanics), we
arrive at a law of motion of the electron which does not agree with
experience. Guided by purely formal points of view, H. A. Lorentz was
the first to introduce the hypothesis that the form of the electron
experiences a contraction in the direction of motion in consequence of
that motion. the contracted length being proportional to the expression

image029


This, hypothesis, which is not justifiable by any electrodynamical
facts, supplies us then with that particular law of motion which has
been confirmed with great precision in recent years.


 [13] The general theory of relativity renders it likely that the
 electrical masses of an electron are held together by gravitational
 forces.


The theory of relativity leads to the same law of motion, without
requiring any special hypothesis whatsoever as to the structure and the
behaviour of the electron. We arrived at a similar conclusion in
Section XIII in connection with the experiment of Fizeau, the result of
which is foretold by the theory of relativity without the necessity of
drawing on hypotheses as to the physical nature of the liquid.

The second class of facts to which we have alluded has reference to the
question whether or not the motion of the earth in space can be made
perceptible in terrestrial experiments. We have already remarked in
Section V that all attempts of this nature led to a negative result.
Before the theory of relativity was put forward, it was difficult to
become reconciled to this negative result, for reasons now to be
discussed. The inherited prejudices about time and space did not allow
any doubt to arise as to the prime importance of the Galileian
transformation for changing over from one body of reference to another.
Now assuming that the Maxwell-Lorentz equations hold for a
reference-body _K_, we then find that they do not hold for a
reference-body _K_ moving uniformly with respect to _K_, if we assume
that the relations of the Galileian transformation exist between the
co-ordinates of _K_ and _K_. It thus appears that, of all Galileian
co-ordinate systems, one (_K_) corresponding to a particular state of
motion is physically unique. This result was interpreted physically by
regarding _K_ as at rest with respect to a hypothetical ther of space.
On the other hand, all coordinate systems _K_ moving relatively to _K_
were to be regarded as in motion with respect to the ther. To this
motion of _K_ against the ther (ther-drift relative to _K_) were
attributed the more complicated laws which were supposed to hold
relative to _K_. Strictly speaking, such an ther-drift ought also to
be assumed relative to the earth, and for a long time the efforts of
physicists were devoted to attempts to detect the existence of an
ther-drift at the earths surface.

In one of the most notable of these attempts Michelson devised a method
which appears as though it must be decisive. Imagine two mirrors so
arranged on a rigid body that the reflecting surfaces face each other.
A ray of light requires a perfectly definite time _T_ to pass from one
mirror to the other and back again, if the whole system be at rest with
respect to the ther. It is found by calculation, however, that a
slightly different time _T_ is required for this process, if the body,
together with the mirrors, be moving relatively to the ther. And yet
another point: it is shown by calculation that for a given velocity _v_
with reference to the ther, this time _T_ is different when the body
is moving perpendicularly to the planes of the mirrors from that
resulting when the motion is parallel to these planes. Although the
estimated difference between these two times is exceedingly small,
Michelson and Morley performed an experiment involving interference in
which this difference should have been clearly detectable. But the
experiment gave a negative resulta fact very perplexing to physicists.
Lorentz and FitzGerald rescued the theory from this difficulty by
assuming that the motion of the body relative to the ther produces a
contraction of the body in the direction of motion, the amount of
contraction being just sufficient to compensate for the differeace in
time mentioned above. Comparison with the discussion in Section XII
shows that also from the standpoint of the theory of relativity this
solution of the difficulty was the right one. But on the basis of the
theory of relativity the method of interpretation is incomparably more
satisfactory. According to this theory there is no such thing as a
specially favoured (unique) co-ordinate system to occasion the
introduction of the ther-idea, and hence there can be no ther-drift,
nor any experiment with which to demonstrate it. Here the contraction
of moving bodies follows from the two fundamental principles of the
theory, without the introduction of particular hypotheses; and as the
prime factor involved in this contraction we find, not the motion in
itself, to which we cannot attach any meaning, but the motion with
respect to the body of reference chosen in the particular case in
point. Thus for a co-ordinate system moving with the earth the mirror
system of Michelson and Morley is not shortened, but it _is_ shortened
for a co-ordinate system which is at rest relatively to the sun.


XVII.

MINKOWSKIS FOUR-DIMENSIONAL SPACE

The non-mathematician is seized by a mysterious shuddering when he
hears of four-dimensional things, by a feeling not unlike that
awakened by thoughts of the occult. And yet there is no more
common-place statement than that the world in which we live is a
four-dimensional space-time continuum.

Space is a three-dimensional continuum. By this we mean that it is
possible to describe the position of a point (at rest) by means of
three numbers (co-ordinates) _x, y, z_, and that there is an indefinite
number of points in the neighbourhood of this one, the position of
which can be described by co-ordinates such as _x1, y1, z1_, which may
be as near as we choose to the respective values of the co-ordinates
_x, y, z_, of the first point. In virtue of the latter property we
speak of a continuum, and owing to the fact that there are three
co-ordinates we speak of it as being three-dimensional.

Similarly, the world of physical phenomena which was briefly called
world by Minkowski is naturally four dimensional in the space-time
sense. For it is composed of individual events, each of which is
described by four numbers, namely, three space co-ordinates _x, y, z_,
and a time co-ordinate, the time value _t_. The world is in this
sense also a continuum; for to every event there are as many
neighbouring events (realised or at least thinkable) as we care to
choose, the co-ordinates _x1, y1, z1, t1_ of which differ by an
indefinitely small amount from those of the event _x, y, z, t_
originally considered. That we have not been accustomed to regard the
world in this sense as a four-dimensional continuum is due to the fact
that in physics, before the advent of the theory of relativity, time
played a different and more independent rle, as compared with the
space coordinates. It is for this reason that we have been in the habit
of treating time as an independent continuum. As a matter of fact,
according to classical mechanics, time is absolute, _i.e._ it is
independent of the position and the condition of motion of the system
of co-ordinates. We see this expressed in the last equation of the
Galileian transformation (_t_ = _t_).

The four-dimensional mode of consideration of the world is natural on
the theory of relativity, since according to this theory time is robbed
of its independence. This is shown by the fourth equation of the
Lorentz transformation:

image030


Moreover, according to this equation the time difference _t_ of two
events with respect to _K_ does not in general vanish, even when the
time difference _t_ of the same events with reference to _K_ vanishes.
Pure space-distance of two events with respect to _K_ results in
time-distance  of the same events with respect to _K_. But the
discovery of Minkowski, which was of importance for the formal
development of the theory of relativity, does not lie here. It is to be
found rather in the fact of his recognition that the four-dimensional
space-time continuum of the theory of relativity, in its most essential
formal properties, shows a pronounced relationship to the
three-dimensional continuum of Euclidean geometrical space.[14] In
order to give due prominence to this relationship, however, we must
replace the usual time co-ordinate t by an imaginary magnitude

image031


proportional to it. Under these conditions, the natural laws satisfying
the demands of the (special) theory of relativity assume mathematical
forms, in which the time co-ordinate plays exactly the same role as the
three space co-ordinates. Formally, these four co-ordinates correspond
exactly to the three space co-ordinates in Euclidean geometry. It must
be clear even to the non-mathematician that, as a consequence of this
purely formal addition to our knowledge, the theory perforce gained
clearness in no mean measure.


 [14] Cf. the somewhat more detailed discussion in Appendix II.


These inadequate remarks can give the reader only a vague notion of the
important idea contributed by Minkowski. Without it the general theory
of relativity, of which the fundamental ideas are developed in the
following pages, would perhaps have got no farther than its long
clothes. Minkowskis work is doubtless difficult of access to anyone
inexperienced in mathematics, but since it is not necessary to have a
very exact grasp of this work in order to understand the fundamental
ideas of either the special or the general theory of relativity, I
shall leave it here at present, and revert to it only towards the end
of Part II.


PART II: THE GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY


XVIII.

SPECIAL AND GENERAL PRINCIPLE OF RELATIVITY

The basal principle, which was the pivot of all our previous
considerations, was the _special_ principle of relativity, _i.e._ the
principle of the physical relativity of all _uniform_ motion. Let as
once more analyse its meaning carefully.

It was at all times clear that, from the point of view of the idea it
conveys to us, every motion must be considered only as a relative
motion. Returning to the illustration we have frequently used of the
embankment and the railway carriage, we can express the fact of the
motion here taking place in the following two forms, both of which are
equally justifiable:

(_a_) The carriage is in motion relative to the embankment,


(_b_) The embankment is in motion relative to the carriage.


In (_a_) the embankment, in (_b_) the carriage, serves as the body of
reference in our statement of the motion taking place. If it is simply
a question of detecting or of describing the motion involved, it is in
principle immaterial to what reference-body we refer the motion. As
already mentioned, this is self-evident, but it must not be confused
with the much more comprehensive statement called the principle of
relativity, which we have taken as the basis of our investigations.

The principle we have made use of not only maintains that we may
equally well choose the carriage or the embankment as our
reference-body for the description of any event (for this, too, is
self-evident). Our principle rather asserts what follows: If we
formulate the general laws of nature as they are obtained from
experience, by making use of

(_a_) the embankment as reference-body,


(_b_) the railway carriage as reference-body,


then these general laws of nature (_e.g._ the laws of mechanics or the
law of the propagation of light _in vacuo_) have exactly the same form
in both cases. This can also be expressed as follows: For the physical
description of natural processes, neither of the reference bodies _K,
K_ is unique (lit. specially marked out) as compared with the other.
Unlike the first, this latter statement need not of necessity hold _a
priori;_ it is not contained in the conceptions of motion and
reference-body and derivable from them; only _experience_ can decide
as to its correctness or incorrectness.

Up to the present, however, we have by no means maintained the
equivalence of _all_ bodies of reference _K_ in connection with the
formulation of natural laws. Our course was more on the following
Iines. In the first place, we started out from the assumption that
there exists a reference-body _K_, whose condition of motion is such
that the Galileian law holds with respect to it: A particle left to
itself and sufficiently far removed from all other particles moves
uniformly in a straight line. With reference to K (Galileian
reference-body) the laws of nature were to be as simple as possible.
But in addition to K, all bodies of reference _K_ should be given
preference in this sense, and they should be exactly equivalent to _K_
for the formulation of natural laws, provided that they are in a state
of _uniform rectilinear and non-rotary motion_ with respect to _K_; all
these bodies of reference are to be regarded as Galileian
reference-bodies. The validity of the principle of relativity was
assumed only for these reference-bodies, but not for others (_e.g._
those possessing motion of a different kind). In this sense we speak of
the _special_ principle of relativity, or special theory of relativity.

In contrast to this we wish to understand by the general principle of
relativity the following statement: All bodies of reference _K, K_,
etc., are equivalent for the description of natural phenomena
(formulation of the general laws of nature), whatever may be their
state of motion. But before proceeding farther, it ought to be pointed
out that this formulation must be replaced later by a more abstract
one, for reasons which will become evident at a later stage.

Since the introduction of the special principle of relativity has been
justified, every intellect which strives after generalisation must feel
the temptation to venture the step towards the general principle of
relativity. But a simple and apparently quite reliable consideration
seems to suggest that, for the present at any rate, there is little
hope of success in such an attempt; Let us imagine ourselves
transferred to our old friend the railway carriage, which is travelling
at a uniform rate. As long as it is moving uniformly, the occupant of
the carriage is not sensible of its motion, and it is for this reason
that he can without reluctance interpret the facts of the case as
indicating that the carriage is at rest, but the embankment in motion.
Moreover, according to the special principle of relativity, this
interpretation is quite justified also from a physical point of view.
If the motion of the carriage is now changed into a non-uniform motion,
as for instance by a powerful application of the brakes, then the
occupant of the carriage experiences a correspondingly powerful jerk
forwards. The retarded motion is manifested in the mechanical behaviour
of bodies relative to the person in the railway carriage. The
mechanical behaviour is different from that of the case previously
considered, and for this reason it would appear to be impossible that
the same mechanical laws hold relatively to the non-uniformly moving
carriage, as hold with reference to the carriage when at rest or in
uniform motion. At all events it is clear that the Galileian law does
not hold with respect to the non-uniformly moving carriage. Because of
this, we feel compelled at the present juncture to grant a kind of
absolute physical reality to non-uniform motion, in opposition to the
general principle of relativity. But in what follows we shall soon see
that this conclusion cannot be maintained.


XIX.

THE GRAVITATIONAL FIELD

If we pick up a stone and then let it go, why does it fall to the
ground? The usual answer to this question is: Because it is attracted
by the earth. Modern physics formulates the answer rather differently
for the following reason. As a result of the more careful study of
electromagnetic phenomena, we have come to regard action at a distance
as a process impossible without the intervention of some intermediary
medium. If, for instance, a magnet attracts a piece of iron, we cannot
be content to regard this as meaning that the magnet acts directly on
the iron through the intermediate empty space, but we are constrained
to imagineafter the manner of Faradaythat the magnet always calls
into being something physically real in the space around it, that
something being what we call a magnetic field. In its turn this
magnetic field operates on the piece of iron, so that the latter
strives to move towards the magnet. We shall not discuss here the
justification for this incidental conception, which is indeed a
somewhat arbitrary one. We shall only mention that with its aid
electromagnetic phenomena can be theoretically represented much more
satisfactorily than without it, and this applies particularly to the
transmission of electromagnetic waves. The effects of gravitation also
are regarded in an analogous manner.

The action of the earth on the stone takes place indirectly. The earth
produces in its surrounding a gravitational field, which acts on the
stone and produces its motion of fall. As we know from experience, the
intensity of the action on a body dimishes according to a quite
definite law, as we proceed farther and farther away from the earth.
From our point of view this means: The law governing the properties of
the gravitational field in space must be a perfectly definite one, in
order correctly to represent the diminution of gravitational action
with the distance from operative bodies. It is something like this: The
body (_e.g._ the earth) produces a field in its immediate neighbourhood
directly; the intensity and direction of the field at points farther
removed from the body are thence determined by the law which governs
the properties in space of the gravitational fields themselves.

In contrast to electric and magnetic fields, the gravitational field
exhibits a most remarkable property, which is of fundamental importance
for what follows. Bodies which are moving under the sole influence of a
gravitational field receive an acceleration, _which does not in the
least depend either on the material or on the physical state of the
body._ For instance, a piece of lead and a piece of wood fall in
exactly the same manner in a gravitational field (_in vacuo_), when
they start off from rest or with the same initial velocity. This law,
which holds most accurately, can be expressed in a different form in
the light of the following consideration.

According to Newtons law of motion, we have

(Force) = (inertial mass) x (acceleration),

where the inertial mass is a characteristic constant of the
accelerated body. If now gravitation is the cause of the acceleration,
we then have

(Force) = (gravitational mass) x (intensity of the gravitational
field),

where the gravitational mass is likewise a characteristic constant
for the body. From these two relations follows:

image032


If now, as we find from experience, the acceleration is to be
independent of the nature and the condition of the body and always the
same for a given gravitational field, then the ratio of the
gravitational to the inertial mass must likewise be the same for all
bodies. By a suitable choice of units we can thus make this ratio equal
to unity. We then have the following law: The _gravitational_ mass of a
body is equal to its _inertial_ mass.

It is true that this important law had hitherto been recorded in
mechanics, but it had not been _interpreted_. A satisfactory
interpretation can be obtained only if we recognise the following fact:
_The same_ quality of a body manifests itself according to
circumstances as inertia or as weight (lit. heaviness). In the
following section we shall show to what extent this is actually the
case, and how this question is connected with the general postulate of
relativity.


XX.

THE EQUALITY OF INERTIAL AND GRAVITATIONAL MASS AS AN ARGUMENT FOR THE
GENERAL POSTULATE OF RELATIVITY

We imagine a large portion of empty space, so far removed from stars
and other appreciable masses, that we have before us approximately the
conditions required by the fundamental law of Galilei. It is then
possible to choose a Galileian reference-body for this part of space
(world), relative to which points at rest remain at rest and points in
motion continue permanently in uniform rectilinear motion. As
reference-body let us imagine a spacious chest resembling a room with
an observer inside who is equipped with apparatus. Gravitation
naturally does not exist for this observer. He must fasten himself with
strings to the floor, otherwise the slightest impact against the floor
will cause him to rise slowly towards the ceiling of the room.

To the middle of the lid of the chest is fixed externally a hook with
rope attached, and now a being (what kind of a being is immaterial to
us) begins pulling at this with a constant force. The chest together
with the observer then begin to move upwards with a uniformly
accelerated motion. In course of time their velocity will reach
unheard-of valuesprovided that we are viewing all this from another
reference-body which is not being pulled with a rope.

But how does the man in the chest regard the Process? The acceleration
of the chest will be transmitted to him by the reaction of the floor of
the chest. He must therefore take up this pressure by means of his legs
if he does not wish to be laid out full length on the floor. He is then
standing in the chest in exactly the same way as anyone stands in a
room of a home on our earth. If he releases a body which he previously
had in his land, the accelertion of the chest will no longer be
transmitted to this body, and for this reason the body will approach
the floor of the chest with an accelerated relative motion. The
observer will further convince himself _that the acceleration of the
body towards the floor of the chest is always of the same magnitude,
whatever kind of body he may happen to use for the experiment._

Relying on his knowledge of the gravitational field (as it was
discussed in the preceding section), the man in the chest will thus
come to the conclusion that he and the chest are in a gravitational
field which is constant with regard to time. Of course he will be
puzzled for a moment as to why the chest does not fall in this
gravitational field. just then, however, he discovers the hook in the
middle of the lid of the chest and the rope which is attached to it,
and he consequently comes to the conclusion that the chest is suspended
at rest in the gravitational field.

Ought we to smile at the man and say that he errs in his conclusion? I
do not believe we ought to if we wish to remain consistent; we must
rather admit that his mode of grasping the situation violates neither
reason nor known mechanical laws. Even though it is being accelerated
with respect to the Galileian space first considered, we can
nevertheless regard the chest as being at rest. We have thus good
grounds for extending the principle of relativity to include bodies of
reference which are accelerated with respect to each other, and as a
result we have gained a powerful argument for a generalised postulate
of relativity.

We must note carefully that the possibility of this mode of
interpretation rests on the fundamental property of the gravitational
field of giving all bodies the same acceleration, or, what comes to the
same thing, on the law of the equality of inertial and gravitational
mass. If this natural law did not exist, the man in the accelerated
chest would not be able to interpret the behaviour of the bodies around
him on the supposition of a gravitational field, and he would not be
justified on the grounds of experience in supposing his reference-body
to be at rest.

Suppose that the man in the chest fixes a rope to the inner side of the
lid, and that he attaches a body to the free end of the rope. The
result of this will be to stretch the rope so that it will hang
vertically downwards. If we ask for an opinion of the cause of
tension in the rope, the man in the chest will say: The suspended body
experiences a downward force in the gravitational field, and this is
neutralised by the tension of the rope; what determines the magnitude
of the tension of the rope is the _gravitational mass_ of the suspended
body. On the other hand, an observer who is poised freely in space
will interpret the condition of things thus: The rope must perforce
take part in the accelerated motion of the chest, and it transmits this
motion to the body attached to it. The tension of the rope is just
large enough to effect the acceleration of the body. That which
determines the magnitude of the tension of the rope is the _inertial
mass_ of the body. Guided by this example, we see that our extension
of the principle of relativity implies the _necessity_ of the law of
the equality of inertial and gravitational mass. Thus we have obtained
a physical interpretation of this law.

From our consideration of the accelerated chest we see that a general
theory of relativity must yield important results on the laws of
gravitation. In point of fact, the systematic pursuit of the general
idea of relativity has supplied the laws satisfied by the gravitational
field. Before proceeding farther, however, I must warn the reader
against a misconception suggested by these considerations. A
gravitational field exists for the man in the chest, despite the fact
that there was no such field for the co-ordinate system first chosen.
Now we might easily suppose that the existence of a gravitational field
is always only an _apparent_ one. We might also think that, regardless
of the kind of gravitational field which may be present, we could
always choose another reference-body such that _no_ gravitational field
exists with reference to it. This is by no means true for all
gravitational fields, but only for those of quite special form. It is,
for instance, impossible to choose a body of reference such that, as
judged from it, the gravitational field of the earth (in its entirety)
vanishes.

We can now appreciate why that argument is not convincing, which we
brought forward against the general principle of relativity at the end
of Section XVIII. It is certainly true that the observer in the railway
carriage experiences a jerk forwards as a result of the application of
the brake, and that he recognises, in this the non-uniformity of motion
(retardation) of the carriage. But he is compelled by nobody to refer
this jerk to a real acceleration (retardation) of the carriage. He
might also interpret his experience thus: My body of reference (the
carriage) remains permanently at rest. With reference to it, however,
there exists (during the period of application of the brakes) a
gravitational field which is directed forwards and which is variable
with respect to time. Under the influence of this field, the embankment
together with the earth moves non-uniformly in such a manner that their
original velocity in the backwards direction is continuously reduced.


XXI.

IN WHAT RESPECTS ARE THE FOUNDATIONS OF CLASSICAL MECHANICS AND OF THE
SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY UNSATISFACTORY?

We have already stated several times that classical mechanics starts
out from the following law: Material particles sufficiently far removed
from other material particles continue to move uniformly in a straight
line or continue in a state of rest. We have also repeatedly emphasised
that this fundamental law can only be valid for bodies of reference _K_
which possess certain unique states of motion, and which are in uniform
translational motion relative to each other. Relative to other
reference-bodies _K_ the law is not valid. Both in classical mechanics
and in the special theory of relativity we therefore differentiate
between reference-bodies _K_ relative to which the recognised laws of
nature can be said to hold, and reference-bodies _K_ relative to which
these laws do not hold.

But no person whose mode of thought is logical can rest satisfied with
this condition of things. He asks: How does it come that certain
reference-bodies (or their states of motion) are given priority over
other reference-bodies (or their states of motion)? _What is the reason
for this preference?_ In order to show clearly what I mean by this
question, I shall make use of a comparison.

I am standing in front of a gas range. Standing alongside of each other
on the range are two pans so much alike that one may be mistaken for
the other. Both are half full of water. I notice that steam is being
emitted continuously from the one pan, but not from the other. I am
surprised at this, even if I have never seen either a gas range or a
pan before. But if I now notice a luminous something of bluish colour
under the first pan but not under the other, I cease to be astonished,
even if I have never before seen a gas flame. For I can only say that
this bluish something will cause the emission of the steam, or at least
_possibly_ it may do so. If, however, I notice the bluish something in
neither case, and if I observe that the one continuously emits steam
whilst the other does not, then I shall remain astonished and
dissatisfied until I have discovered some circumstance to which I can
attribute the different behaviour of the two pans.

Analogously, I seek in vain for a real something in classical mechanics
(or in the special theory of relativity) to which I can attribute the
different behaviour of bodies considered with respect to the reference
systems _K_ and _K_.[15] Newton saw this objection and attempted to
invalidate it, but without success. But E. Mach recognised it most
clearly of all, and because of this objection he claimed that mechanics
must be placed on a new basis. It can only be got rid of by means of a
physics which is conformable to the general principle of relativity,
since the equations of such a theory hold for every body of reference,
whatever may be its state of motion.


 [15] The objection is of importance more especially when the state of
 motion of the reference-body is of such a nature that it does not
 require any external agency for its maintenance, _e.g._ in the case
 when the reference-body is rotating uniformly.


XXII.

A FEW INFERENCES FROM THE GENERAL PRINCIPLE OF RELATIVITY

The considerations of Section XX show that the general principle of
relativity puts us in a position to derive properties of the
gravitational field in a purely theoretical manner. Let us suppose, for
instance, that we know the space-time course for any natural process
whatsoever, as regards the manner in which it takes place in the
Galileian domain relative to a Galileian body of reference _K_. By
means of purely theoretical operations (_i.e._ simply by calculation)
we are then able to find how this known natural process appears, as
seen from a reference-body _K_ which is accelerated relatively to _K_.
But since a gravitational field exists with respect to this new body of
reference _K_, our consideration also teaches us how the gravitational
field influences the process studied.

For example, we learn that a body which is in a state of uniform
rectilinear motion with respect to _K_ (in accordance with the law of
Galilei) is executing an accelerated and in general curvilinear motion
with respect to the accelerated reference-body _K_ (chest). This
acceleration or curvature corresponds to the influence on the moving
body of the gravitational field prevailing relatively to _K_. It is
known that a gravitational field influences the movement of bodies in
this way, so that our consideration supplies us with nothing
essentially new.

However, we obtain a new result of fundamental importance when we carry
out the analogous consideration for a ray of light. With respect to the
Galileian reference-body _K_, such a ray of light is transmitted
rectilinearly with the velocity _c_. It can easily be shown that the
path of the same ray of light is no longer a straight line when we
consider it with reference to the accelerated chest (reference-body
_K_). From this we conclude, _that, in general, rays of light are
propagated curvilinearly in gravitational fields._ In two respects this
result is of great importance.

In the first place, it can be compared with the reality. Although a
detailed examination of the question shows that the curvature of light
rays required by the general theory of relativity is only exceedingly
small for the gravitational fields at our disposal in practice, its
estimated magnitude for light rays passing the sun at grazing incidence
is nevertheless 1.7 seconds of arc. This ought to manifest itself in
the following way. As seen from the earth, certain fixed stars appear
to be in the neighbourhood of the sun, and are thus capable of
observation during a total eclipse of the sun. At such times, these
stars ought to appear to be displaced outwards from the sun by an
amount indicated above, as compared with their apparent position in the
sky when the sun is situated at another part of the heavens. The
examination of the correctness or otherwise of this deduction is a
problem of the greatest importance, the early solution of which is to
be expected of astronomers.[16]


 [16] By means of the star photographs of two expeditions equipped by a
 Joint Committee of the Royal and Royal Astronomical Societies, the
 existence of the deflection of light demanded by theory was first
 confirmed during the solar eclipse of 29th May, 1919. (Cf. Appendix
 III.)


In the second place our result shows that, according to the general
theory of relativity, the law of the constancy of the velocity of light
in vacuo, which constitutes one of the two fundamental assumptions in
the special theory of relativity and to which we have already
frequently referred, cannot claim any unlimited validity. A curvature
of rays of light can only take place when the velocity of propagation
of light varies with position. Now we might think that as a consequence
of this, the special theory of relativity and with it the whole theory
of relativity would be laid in the dust. But in reality this is not the
case. We can only conclude that the special theory of relativity cannot
claim an unlimited domain of validity; its results hold only so long as
we are able to disregard the influences of gravitational fields on the
phenomena (_e.g._ of light).

Since it has often been contended by opponents of the theory of
relativity that the special theory of relativity is overthrown by the
general theory of relativity, it is perhaps advisable to make the facts
of the case clearer by means of an appropriate comparison. Before the
development of electrodynamics the laws of electrostatics were looked
upon as the laws of electricity. At the present time we know that
electric fields can be derived correctly from electrostatic
considerations only for the case, which is never strictly realised, in
which the electrical masses are quite at rest relatively to each other,
and to the co-ordinate system. Should we be justified in saying that
for this reason electrostatics is overthrown by the field-equations of
Maxwell in electrodynamics? Not in the least. Electrostatics is
contained in electrodynamics as a limiting case; the laws of the latter
lead directly to those of the former for the case in which the fields
are invariable with regard to time. No fairer destiny could be allotted
to any physical theory, than that it should of itself point out the way
to the introduction of a more comprehensive theory, in which it lives
on as a limiting case.

In the example of the transmission of light just dealt with, we have
seen that the general theory of relativity enables us to derive
theoretically the influence of a gravitational field on the course of
natural processes, the laws of which are already known when a
gravitational field is absent. But the most attractive problem, to the
solution of which the general theory of relativity supplies the key,
concerns the investigation of the laws satisfied by the gravitational
field itself. Let us consider this for a moment.

We are acquainted with space-time domains which behave (approximately)
in a Galileian fashion under suitable choice of reference-body,
_i.e._ domains in which gravitational fields are absent. If we now
refer such a domain to a reference-body _K_ possessing any kind of
motion, then relative to _K_ there exists a gravitational field which
is variable with respect to space and time.[17] The character of this
field will of course depend on the motion chosen for _K._ According to
the general theory of relativity, the general law of the gravitational
field must be satisfied for all gravitational fields obtainable in this
way. Even though by no means all gravitationial fields can be produced
in this way, yet we may entertain the hope that the general law of
gravitation will be derivable from such gravitational fields of a
special kind. This hope has been realised in the most beautiful manner.
But between the clear vision of this goal and its actual realisation it
was necessary to surmount a serious difficulty, and as this lies deep
at the root of things, I dare not withhold it from the reader. We
require to extend our ideas of the space-time continuum still farther.


 [17] This follows from a generalisation of the discussion in Section
 XX.


XXIII.

BEHAVIOUR OF CLOCKS AND MEASURING-RODS ON A ROTATING BODY OF REFERENCE

Hitherto I have purposely refrained from speaking about the physical
interpretation of space- and time-data in the case of the general
theory of relativity. As a consequence, I am guilty of a certain
slovenliness of treatment, which, as we know from the special theory of
relativity, is far from being unimportant and pardonable. It is now
high time that we remedy this defect; but I would mention at the
outset, that this matter lays no small claims on the patience and on
the power of abstraction of the reader.

We start off again from quite special cases, which we have frequently
used before. Let us consider a space time domain in which no
gravitational field exists relative to a reference-body _K_ whose state
of motion has been suitably chosen. _K_ is then a Galileian
reference-body as regards the domain considered, and the results of the
special theory of relativity hold relative to _K_. Let us suppose the
same domain referred to a second body of reference _K_, which is
rotating uniformly with respect to _K_. In order to fix our ideas, we
shall imagine _K_ to be in the form of a plane circular disc, which
rotates uniformly in its own plane about its centre. An observer who is
sitting eccentrically on the disc _K_ is sensible of a force which
acts outwards in a radial direction, and which would be interpreted as
an effect of inertia (centrifugal force) by an observer who was at rest
with respect to the original reference-body _K_. But the observer on
the disc may regard his disc as a reference-body which is at rest; on
the basis of the general principle of relativity he is justified in
doing this. The force acting on himself, and in fact on all other
bodies which are at rest relative to the disc, he regards as the effect
of a gravitational field. Nevertheless, the space-distribution of this
gravitational field is of a kind that would not be possible on Newtons
theory of gravitation.[18] But since the observer believes in the
general theory of relativity, this does not disturb him; he is quite in
the right when he believes that a general law of gravitation can be
formulateda law which not only explains the motion of the stars
correctly, but also the field of force experienced by himself.


 [18] The field disappears at the centre of the disc and increases
 proportionally to the distance from the centre as we proceed outwards.


The observer performs experiments on his circular disc with clocks and
measuring-rods. In doing so, it is his intention to arrive at exact
definitions for the signification of time- and space-data with
reference to the circular disc _K_, these definitions being based on
his observations. What will be his experience in this enterprise?

To start with, he places one of two identically constructed clocks at
the centre of the circular disc, and the other on the edge of the disc,
so that they are at rest relative to it. We now ask ourselves whether
both clocks go at the same rate from the standpoint of the non-rotating
Galileian reference-body _K_. As judged from this body, the clock at
the centre of the disc has no velocity, whereas the clock at the edge
of the disc is in motion relative to _K_ in consequence of the
rotation. According to a result obtained in Section XII, it follows
that the latter clock goes at a rate permanently slower than that of
the clock at the centre of the circular disc, _i.e._ as observed from
_K_. It is obvious that the same effect would be noted by an observer
whom we will imagine sitting alongside his clock at the centre of the
circular disc. Thus on our circular disc, or, to make the case more
general, in every gravitational field, a clock will go more quickly or
less quickly, according to the position in which the clock is situated
(at rest). For this reason it is not possible to obtain a reasonable
definition of time with the aid of clocks which are arranged at rest
with respect to the body of reference. A similar difficulty presents
itself when we attempt to apply our earlier definition of simultaneity
in such a case, but I do not wish to go any farther into this question.

Moreover, at this stage the definition of the space co-ordinates also
presents insurmountable difficulties. If the observer applies his
standard measuring-rod (a rod which is short as compared with the
radius of the disc) tangentially to the edge of the disc, then, as
judged from the Galileian system, the length of this rod will be less
than 1, since, according to Section XII, moving bodies suffer a
shortening in the direction of the motion. On the other hand, the
measuring-rod will not experience a shortening in length, as judged
from _K_, if it is applied to the disc in the direction of the radius.
If, then, the observer first measures the circumference of the disc
with his measuring-rod and then the diameter of the disc, on dividing
the one by the other, he will not obtain as quotient the familiar
number  = 3.14 . . ., but a larger number,[19] whereas of course, for
a disc which is at rest with respect to _K_, this operation would yield
 exactly. This proves that the propositions of Euclidean geometry
cannot hold exactly on the rotating disc, nor in general in a
gravitational field, at least if we attribute the length 1 to the rod
in all positions and in every orientation. Hence the idea of a straight
line also loses its meaning. We are therefore not in a position to
define exactly the co-ordinates _x, y, z_ relative to the disc by means
of the method used in discussing the special theory, and as long as the
co-ordinates and times of events have not been defined, we cannot
assign an exact meaning to the natural laws in which these occur.


 [19] Throughout this consideration we have to use the Galileian
 (non-rotating) system _K_ as reference-body, since we may only assume
 the validity of the results of the special theory of relativity
 relative to _K_ (relative to _K_ a gravitational field prevails).


Thus all our previous conclusions based on general relativity would
appear to be called in question. In reality we must make a subtle
detour in order to be able to apply the postulate of general relativity
exactly. I shall prepare the reader for this in the following
paragraphs.


XXIV.

EUCLIDEAN AND NON-EUCLIDEAN CONTINUUM

The surface of a marble table is spread out in front of me. I can get
from any one point on this table to any other point by passing
continuously from one point to a neighbouring one, and repeating this
process a (large) number of times, or, in other words, by going from
point to point without executing jumps. I am sure the reader will
appreciate with sufficient clearness what I mean here by neighbouring
and by jumps (if he is not too pedantic). We express this property of
the surface by describing the latter as a continuum.

Let us now imagine that a large number of little rods of equal length
have been made, their lengths being small compared with the dimensions
of the marble slab. When I say they are of equal length, I mean that
one can be laid on any other without the ends overlapping. We next lay
four of these little rods on the marble slab so that they constitute a
quadrilateral figure (a square), the diagonals of which are equally
long. To ensure the equality of the diagonals, we make use of a little
testing-rod. To this square we add similar ones, each of which has one
rod in common with the first. We proceed in like manner with each of
these squares until finally the whole marble slab is laid out with
squares. The arrangement is such, that each side of a square belongs to
two squares and each corner to four squares.

It is a veritable wonder that we can carry out this business without
getting into the greatest difficulties. We only need to think of the
following. If at any moment three squares meet at a corner, then two
sides of the fourth square are already laid, and, as a consequence, the
arrangement of the remaining two sides of the square is already
completely determined. But I am now no longer able to adjust the
quadrilateral so that its diagonals may be equal. If they are equal of
their own accord, then this is an especial favour of the marble slab
and of the little rods, about which I can only be thankfully surprised.
We must experience many such surprises if the construction is to be
successful.

If everything has really gone smoothly, then I say that the points of
the marble slab constitute a Euclidean continuum with respect to the
little rod, which has been used as a distance (line-interval). By
choosing one corner of a square as origin I can characterise every
other corner of a square with reference to this origin by means of two
numbers. I only need state how many rods I must pass over when,
starting from the origin, I proceed towards the right and then
upwards, in order to arrive at the corner of the square under
consideration. These two numbers are then the Cartesian co-ordinates
of this corner with reference to the Cartesian co-ordinate system
which is determined by the arrangement of little rods.

By making use of the following modification of this abstract
experiment, we recognise that there must also be cases in which the
experiment would be unsuccessful. We shall suppose that the rods
expand by in amount proportional to the increase of temperature. We
heat the central part of the marble slab, but not the periphery, in
which case two of our little rods can still be brought into coincidence
at every position on the table. But our construction of squares must
necessarily come into disorder during the heating, because the little
rods on the central region of the table expand, whereas those on the
outer part do not.

With reference to our little rodsdefined as unit lengthsthe marble
slab is no longer a Euclidean continuum, and we are also no longer in
the position of defining Cartesian co-ordinates directly with their
aid, since the above construction can no longer be carried out. But
since there are other things which are not influenced in a similar
manner to the little rods (or perhaps not at all) by the temperature of
the table, it is possible quite naturally to maintain the point of view
that the marble slab is a Euclidean continuum. This can be done in a
satisfactory manner by making a more subtle stipulation about the
measurement or the comparison of lengths.

But if rods of every kind (_i.e._ of every material) were to behave _in
the same way_ as regards the influence of temperature when they are on
the variably heated marble slab, and if we had no other means of
detecting the effect of temperature than the geometrical behaviour of
our rods in experiments analogous to the one described above, then our
best plan would be to assign the distance one to two points on the
slab, provided that the ends of one of our rods could be made to
coincide with these two points; for how else should we define the
distance without our proceeding being in the highest measure grossly
arbitrary? The method of Cartesian coordinates must then be discarded,
and replaced by another which does not assume the validity of Euclidean
geometry for rigid bodies.[20] The reader will notice that the
situation depicted here corresponds to the one brought about by the
general postulate of relativity (Section XXIII).


 [20] Mathematicians have been confronted with our problem in the
 following form. If we are given a surface (_e.g._ an ellipsoid) in
 Euclidean three-dimensional space, then there exists for this surface
 a two-dimensional geometry, just as much as for a plane surface. Gauss
 undertook the task of treating this two-dimensional geometry from
 first principles, without making use of the fact that the surface
 belongs to a Euclidean continuum of three dimensions. If we imagine
 constructions to be made with rigid rods _in the surface_ (similar to
 that above with the marble slab), we should find that different laws
 hold for these from those resulting on the basis of Euclidean plane
 geometry. The surface is not a Euclidean continuum with respect to the
 rods, and we cannot define Cartesian co-ordinates _in the surface_.
 Gauss indicated the principles according to which we can treat the
 geometrical relationships in the surface, and thus pointed out the way
 to the method of Riemann of treating multi-dimensional, non-Euclidean
 _continuum_. Thus it is that mathematicians long ago solved the formal
 problems to which we are led by the general postulate of relativity.


XXV.

GAUSSIAN CO-ORDINATES

image033


According to Gauss, this combined analytical and geometrical mode of
handling the problem can be arrived at in the following way. We imagine
a system of arbitrary curves (see Fig. 4) drawn on the surface of the
table. These we designate as _u_-curves, and we indicate each of them
by means of a number. The Curves _u_ = 1, _u_ = 2 and _u_ = 3 are drawn
in the diagram. Between the curves _u_ = 1 and _u_ = 2 we must imagine
an infinitely large number to be drawn, all of which correspond to real
numbers lying between 1 and 2. We have then a system of _u_-curves, and
this infinitely dense system covers the whole surface of the table.
These _u_-curves must not intersect each other, and through each point
of the surface one and only one curve must pass. Thus a perfectly
definite value of _u_ belongs to every point on the surface of the
marble slab. In like manner we imagine a system of _v_-curves drawn on
the surface. These satisfy the same conditions as the _u_-curves, they
are provided with numbers in a corresponding manner, and they may
likewise be of arbitrary shape. It follows that a value of _u_ and a
value of _v_ belong to every point on the surface of the table. We call
these two numbers the co-ordinates of the surface of the table
(Gaussian co-ordinates). For example, the point _P_ in the diagram has
the Gaussian co-ordinates _u_ = 3, _v_ = 1. Two neighbouring points _P_
and _P_ on the surface then correspond to the co-ordinates

_P_: _u, v_

_P_: _u_ + _du, v_ + _dv_,

where _du_ and _dv_ signify very small numbers. In a similar manner we
may indicate the distance (line-interval) between _P_ and _P_, as
measured with a little rod, by means of the very small number _ds_.
Then according to Gauss we have

_ds_2 = _g_11_du_2 + 2_g_12_du dv_ + _g_22_dv_2,

where _g_11, _g_12, _g_22, are magnitudes which depend in a perfectly
definite way on _u_ and _v_. The magnitudes _g_11, _g_12 and _g_22,
determine the behaviour of the rods relative to the _u_-curves and
_v_-curves, and thus also relative to the surface of the table. For the
case in which the points of the surface considered form a Euclidean
continuum with reference to the measuring-rods, but only in this case,
it is possible to draw the _u_-curves and _v_-curves and to attach
numbers to them, in such a manner, that we simply have:

_ds_2 = _du_2 + _dv_2

Under these conditions, the _u_-curves and _v_-curves are straight
lines in the sense of Euclidean geometry, and they are perpendicular to
each other. Here the Gaussian coordinates are simply Cartesian ones. It
is clear that Gauss co-ordinates are nothing more than an association
of two sets of numbers with the points of the surface considered, of
such a nature that numerical values differing very slightly from each
other are associated with neighbouring points in space.

So far, these considerations hold for a continuum of two dimensions.
But the Gaussian method can be applied also to a continuum of three,
four or more dimensions. If, for instance, a continuum of four
dimensions be supposed available, we may represent it in the following
way. With every point of the continuum, we associate arbitrarily four
numbers, _x_1, _x_2, _x_3, _x_4, which are known as co-ordinates.
Adjacent points correspond to adjacent values of the coordinates. If a
distance _ds_ is associated with the adjacent points _P_ and _P_, this
distance being measurable and well defined from a physical point of
view, then the following formula holds:

_ds_2 = _g_11_dx_12 + 2_g_12_dx_1_dx_2 . . . . + _g_44_dx_42,

where the magnitudes _g_11, etc., have values which vary with the
position in the continuum. Only when the continuum is a Euclidean one
is it possible to associate the co-ordinates _x_1 . . _x_4. with the
points of the continuum so that we have simply

_ds_2 = _dx_12 + _dx_22 + _dx_32 + _dx_42.

In this case relations hold in the four-dimensional continuum which are
analogous to those holding in our three-dimensional measurements.

However, the Gauss treatment for _ds_2 which we have given above is not
always possible. It is only possible when sufficiently small regions of
the continuum under consideration may be regarded as Euclidean
continua. For example, this obviously holds in the case of the marble
slab of the table and local variation of temperature. The temperature
is practically constant for a small part of the slab, and thus the
geometrical behaviour of the rods is _almost_ as it ought to be
according to the rules of Euclidean geometry. Hence the imperfections
of the construction of squares in the previous section do not show
themselves clearly until this construction is extended over a
considerable portion of the surface of the table.

We can sum this up as follows: Gauss invented a method for the
mathematical treatment of continua in general, in which
size-relations (distances between neighbouring points) are defined.
To every point of a continuum are assigned as many numbers (Gaussian
coordinates) as the continuum has dimensions. This is done in such a
way, that only one meaning can be attached to the assignment, and that
numbers (Gaussian coordinates) which differ by an indefinitely small
amount are assigned to adjacent points. The Gaussian coordinate system
is a logical generalisation of the Cartesian co-ordinate system. It is
also applicable to non-Euclidean continua, but only when, with respect
to the defined size or distance, small parts of the continuum under
consideration behave more nearly like a Euclidean system, the smaller
the part of the continuum under our notice.


XXVI.

THE SPACE-TIME CONTINUUM OF THE SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY CONSIDERED
AS A EUCLIDEAN CONTINUUM

We are now in a position to formulate more exactly the idea of
Minkowski, which was only vaguely indicated in Section XVII. In
accordance with the special theory of relativity, certain co-ordinate
systems are given preference for the description of the
four-dimensional, space-time continuum. We called these Galileian
co-ordinate systems. For these systems, the four co-ordinates _x, y,
z, t_, which determine an event orin other wordsa point of the
four-dimensional continuum, are defined physically in a simple manner,
as set forth in detail in the first part of this book. For the
transition from one Galileian system to another, which is moving
uniformly with reference to the first, the equations of the Lorentz
transformation are valid. These last form the basis for the derivation
of deductions from the special theory of relativity, and in themselves
they are nothing more than the expression of the universal validity of
the law of transmission of light for all Galileian systems of
reference.

Minkowski found that the Lorentz transformations satisfy the following
simple conditions. Let us consider two neighbouring events, the
relative position of which in the four-dimensional continuum is given
with respect to a Galileian reference-body _K_ by the space co-ordinate
differences _dx, dy, dz_ and the time-difference _dt_. With reference
to a second Galileian system we shall suppose that the corresponding
differences for these two events are _dx, dy, dz, dt_. Then these
magnitudes always fulfill the condition.[21]


 [21] Cf. Appendixes I and II. The relations which are derived there
 for the co-ordinates themselves are valid also for co-ordinate
 _differences_, and thus also for co-ordinate differentials
 (indefinitely small differences).


_dx_2 + _dy_2 + _dz_2  _c_2_dt_2 = _dx_2 + _dy_2 + _dz_2 
_c_2_dt_2.


The validity of the Lorentz transformation follows from this condition.
We can express this as follows: The magnitude

_ds_2 = _dx_2 + _dy_2 + _dz_2  _c_2 _dt_2,


which belongs to two adjacent points of the four-dimensional space-time
continuum, has the same value for all selected (Galileian)
reference-bodies. If we replace _x, y, z_,

image034


by _x_1, _x_2, _x_3, _x_4, we also obtain the result that

_ds_2 = _dx_12 + _dx_22 + _dx_32 + _dx_42.


is independent of the choice of the body of reference. We call the
magnitude _ds_ the distance apart of the two events or
four-dimensional points.

Thus, if we choose as time-variable the imaginary variable

image035


instead of the real quantity _t_, we can regard the space-time
contintiumaccordance with the special theory of relativityas a
Euclidean four-dimensional continuum, a result which follows from the
considerations of the preceding section.


XXVII.

THE SPACE-TIME CONTINUUM OF THE GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY IS NOT A
EUCLIDEAN CONTINUUM

In the first part of this book we were able to make use of space-time
co-ordinates which allowed of a simple and direct physical
interpretation, and which, according to Section XXVI, can be regarded
as four-dimensional Cartesian co-ordinates. This was possible on the
basis of the law of the constancy of the velocity of light. But
according to Section XXI the general theory of relativity cannot retain
this law. On the contrary, we arrived at the result that according to
this latter theory the velocity of light must always depend on the
co-ordinates when a gravitational field is present. In connection with
a specific illustration in Section XXIII, we found that the presence of
a gravitational field invalidates the definition of the coordinates and
the time, which led us to our objective in the special theory of
relativity.

In view of the resuIts of these considerations we are led to the
conviction that, according to the general principle of relativity, the
space-time continuum cannot be regarded as a Euclidean one, but that
here we have the general case, corresponding to the marble slab with
local variations of temperature, and with which we made acquaintance as
an example of a two-dimensional continuum. Just as it was there
impossible to construct a Cartesian co-ordinate system from equal rods,
so here it is impossible to build up a system (reference-body) from
rigid bodies and clocks, which shall be of such a nature that
measuring-rods and clocks, arranged rigidly with respect to one
another, shall indicate position and time directly. Such was the
essence of the difficulty with which we were confronted in Section
XXIII.

But the considerations of Sections XXV and XXVI show us the way to
surmount this difficulty. We refer the four-dimensional space-time
continuum in an arbitrary manner to Gauss co-ordinates. We assign to
every point of the continuum (event) four numbers, _x_1, _x_2, _x_3,
_x_4 (co-ordinates), which have not the least direct physical
significance, but only serve the purpose of numbering the points of the
continuum in a definite but arbitrary manner. This arrangement does not
even need to be of such a kind that we must regard _x_1, _x_2, _x_3, as
space co-ordinates and _x_4, as a time co-ordinate.

The reader may think that such a description of the world would be
quite inadequate. What does it mean to assign to an event the
particular co-ordinates _x_1, _x_2, _x_3, _x_4, if in themselves these
co-ordinates have no significance? More careful consideration shows,
however, that this anxiety is unfounded. Let us consider, for instance,
a material point with any kind of motion. If this point had only a
momentary existence without duration, then it would to described in
space-time by a single system of values _x_1, _x_2, _x_3, _x_4. Thus
its permanent existence must be characterised by an infinitely large
number of such systems of values, the co-ordinate values of which are
so close together as to give continuity; corresponding to the material
point, we thus have a (uni-dimensional) line in the four-dimensional
continuum. In the same way, any such lines in our continuum correspond
to many points in motion. The only statements having regard to these
points which can claim a physical existence are in reality the
statements about their encounters. In our mathematical treatment, such
an encounter is expressed in the fact that the two lines which
represent the motions of the points in question have a particular
system of co-ordinate values, _x_1, _x_2, _x_3, _x_4, in common. After
mature consideration the reader will doubtless admit that in reality
such encounters constitute the only actual evidence of a time-space
nature with which we meet in physical statements.

When we were describing the motion of a material point relative to a
body of reference, we stated nothing more than the encounters of this
point with particular points of the reference-body. We can also
determine the corresponding values of the time by the observation of
encounters of the body with clocks, in conjunction with the observation
of the encounter of the hands of clocks with particular points on the
dials. It is just the same in the case of space-measurements by means
of measuring-rods, as a little consideration will show.

The following statements hold generally: Every physical description
resolves itself into a number of statements, each of which refers to
the space-time coincidence of two events _A_ and _B_. In terms of
Gaussian co-ordinates, every such statement is expressed by the
agreement of their four co-ordinates _x_1, _x_2, _x_3, _x_4. Thus in
reality, the description of the time-space continuum by means of Gauss
co-ordinates completely replaces the description with the aid of a body
of reference, without suffering from the defects of the latter mode of
description; it is not tied down to the Euclidean character of the
continuum which has to be represented.


XXVIII.

EXACT FORMULATION OF THE GENERAL PRINCIPLE OF RELATIVITY

We are now in a position to replace the provisional formulation of the
general principle of relativity given in Section XVIII by an exact
formulation. The form there used, All bodies of reference _K, K_,
etc., are equivalent for the description of natural phenomena
(formulation of the general laws of nature), whatever may be their
state of motion, cannot be maintained, because the use of rigid
reference-bodies, in the sense of the method followed in the special
theory of relativity, is in general not possible in space-time
description. The Gauss co-ordinate system has to take the place of the
body of reference. The following statement corresponds to the
fundamental idea of the general principle of relativity: _All Gaussian
co-ordinate systems are essentially equivalent for the formulation of
the general laws of nature._

We can state this general principle of relativity in still another
form, which renders it yet more clearly intelligible than it is when in
the form of the natural extension of the special principle of
relativity. According to the special theory of relativity, the
equations which express the general laws of nature pass over into
equations of the same form when, by making use of the Lorentz
transformation, we replace the space-time variables _x, y, z, t_, of a
(Galileian) reference-body _K_ by the space-time variables _x, y, z,
t_, of a new reference-body _K_. According to the general theory of
relativity, on the other hand, by application of _arbitrary
substitutions_ of the Gauss variables _x_1, _x_2, _x_3, _x_4, the
equations must pass over into equations of the same form; for every
transformation (not only the Lorentz transformation) corresponds to the
transition of one Gauss co-ordinate system into another.

If we desire to adhere to our old-time three-dimensional view of
things, then we can characterise the development which is being
undergone by the fundamental idea of the general theory of relativity
as follows: The special theory of relativity has reference to Galileian
domains, _i.e._ to those in which no gravitational field exists. In
this connection a Galileian reference-body serves as body of reference,
_i.e._ a rigid body the state of motion of which is so chosen that the
Galileian law of the uniform rectilinear motion of isolated material
points holds relatively to it.

Certain considerations suggest that we should refer the same Galileian
domains to _non-Galileian_ reference-bodies also. A gravitational field
of a special kind is then present with respect to these bodies (cf.
Sections XX and XXIII).

In gravitational fields there are no such things as rigid bodies with
Euclidean properties; thus the fictitious rigid body of reference is of
no avail in the general theory of relativity. The motion of clocks is
also influenced by gravitational fields, and in such a way that a
physical definition of time which is made directly with the aid of
clocks has by no means the same degree of plausibility as in the
special theory of relativity.

For this reason non-rigid reference-bodies are used, which are as a
whole not only moving in any way whatsoever, but which also suffer
alterations in form _ad lib._ during their motion. Clocks, for which
the law of motion is of any kind, however irregular, serve for the
definition of time. We have to imagine each of these clocks fixed at a
point on the non-rigid reference-body. These clocks satisfy only the
one condition, that the readings which are observed simultaneously on
adjacent clocks (in space) differ from each other by an indefinitely
small amount. This non-rigid reference-body, which might appropriately
be termed a reference-mollusc, is in the main equivalent to a
Gaussian four-dimensional co-ordinate system chosen arbitrarily. That
which gives the mollusc a certain comprehensibility as compared with
the Gauss co-ordinate system is the (really unjustified) formal
retention of the separate existence of the

space co-ordinates as opposed to the time co-ordinate. Every point on
the mollusc is treated as a space-point, and every material point which
is at rest relatively to it as at rest, so long as the mollusc is
considered as reference-body. The general principle of relativity
requires that all these molluscs can be used as reference-bodies with
equal right and equal success in the formulation of the general laws of
nature; the laws themselves must be quite independent of the choice of
mollusc.

The great power possessed by the general principle of relativity lies
in the comprehensive limitation which is imposed on the laws of nature
in consequence of what we have seen above.


XXIX.

THE SOLUTION OF THE PROBLEM OF GRAVITATION ON THE BASIS OF THE GENERAL
PRINCIPLE OF RELATIVITY

If the reader has followed all our previous considerations, he will
have no further difficulty in understanding the methods leading to the
solution of the problem of gravitation.

We start off on a consideration of a Galileian domain, _i.e._ a domain
in which there is no gravitational field relative to the Galileian
reference-body _K_. The behaviour of measuring-rods and clocks with
reference to _K_ is known from the special theory of relativity,
likewise the behaviour of isolated material points; the latter move
uniformly and in straight lines.

Now let us refer this domain to a random Gauss coordinate system or to
a mollusc as reference-body _K_. Then with respect to _K_ there is
a gravitational field _G_ (of a particular kind). We learn the
behaviour of measuring-rods and clocks and also of freely-moving
material points with reference to _K_ simply by mathematical
transformation. We interpret this behaviour as the behaviour of
measuring-rods, clocks and material points under the influence of the
gravitational field _G_. Hereupon we introduce a hypothesis: that the
influence of the gravitational field on measuring-rods, clocks and
freely-moving material points continues to take place according to the
same laws, even in the case where the prevailing gravitational field is
_not_ derivable from the Galileian special case, simply by means of a
transformation of co-ordinates.

The next step is to investigate the space-time behaviour of the
gravitational field _G_, which was derived from the Galileian special
case simply by transformation of the coordinates. This behaviour is
formulated in a law, which is always valid, no matter how the
reference-body (mollusc) used in the description may be chosen.

This law is not yet the _general_ law of the gravitational field, since
the gravitational field under consideration is of a special kind. In
order to find out the general law-of-field of gravitation we still
require to obtain a generalisation of the law as found above. This can
be obtained without caprice, however, by taking into consideration the
following demands:

(_a_) The required generalisation must likewise satisfy the general
postulate of relativity.


(_b_) If there is any matter in the domain under consideration, only
its inertial mass, and thus according to Section XV only its energy is
of importance for its effect in exciting a field.


(_c_) Gravitational field and matter together must satisfy the law of
the conservation of energy (and of impulse).


Finally, the general principle of relativity permits us to determine
the influence of the gravitational field on the course of all those
processes which take place according to known laws when a gravitational
field is absent _i.e._ which have already been fitted into the frame of
the special theory of relativity. In this connection we proceed in
principle according to the method which has already been explained for
measuring-rods, clocks and freely moving material points.

The theory of gravitation derived in this way from the general
postulate of relativity excels not only in its beauty; nor in removing
the defect attaching to classical mechanics which was brought to light
in Section XXI; nor in interpreting the empirical law of the equality
of inertial and gravitational mass; but it has also already explained a
result of observation in astronomy, against which classical mechanics
is powerless.

If we confine the application of the theory to the case where the
gravitational fields can be regarded as being weak, and in which all
masses move with respect to the coordinate system with velocities which
are small compared with the velocity of light, we then obtain as a
first approximation the Newtonian theory. Thus the latter theory is
obtained here without any particular assumption, whereas Newton had to
introduce the hypothesis that the force of attraction between mutually
attracting material points is inversely proportional to the square of
the distance between them. If we increase the accuracy of the
calculation, deviations from the theory of Newton make their
appearance, practically all of which must nevertheless escape the test
of observation owing to their smallness.

We must draw attention here to one of these deviations. According to
Newtons theory, a planet moves round the sun in an ellipse, which
would permanently maintain its position with respect to the fixed
stars, if we could disregard the motion of the fixed stars themselves
and the action of the other planets under consideration. Thus, if we
correct the observed motion of the planets for these two influences,
and if Newtons theory be strictly correct, we ought to obtain for the
orbit of the planet an ellipse, which is fixed with reference to the
fixed stars. This deduction, which can be tested with great accuracy,
has been confirmed for all the planets save one, with the precision
that is capable of being obtained by the delicacy of observation
attainable at the present time. The sole exception is Mercury, the
planet which lies nearest the sun. Since the time of Leverrier, it has
been known that the ellipse corresponding to the orbit of Mercury,
after it has been corrected for the influences mentioned above, is not
stationary with respect to the fixed stars, but that it rotates
exceedingly slowly in the plane of the orbit and in the sense of the
orbital motion. The value obtained for this rotary movement of the
orbital ellipse was 43 seconds of arc per century, an amount ensured to
be correct to within a few seconds of arc. This effect can be explained
by means of classical mechanics only on the assumption of hypotheses
which have little probability, and which were devised solely for this
purponse.

On the basis of the general theory of relativity, it is found that the
ellipse of every planet round the sun must necessarily rotate in the
manner indicated above; that for all the planets, with the exception of
Mercury, this rotation is too small to be detected with the delicacy of
observation possible at the present time; but that in the case of
Mercury it must amount to 43 seconds of arc per century, a result which
is strictly in agreement with observation.

Apart from this one, it has hitherto been possible to make only two
deductions from the theory which admit of being tested by observation,
to wit, the curvature of light rays by the gravitational field of the
sun,[22] and a displacement of the spectral lines of light reaching us
from large stars, as compared with the corresponding lines for light
produced in an analogous manner terrestrially (_i.e._ by the same kind
of atom).[23] These two deductions from the theory have both been
confirmed.


 [22] First observed by Eddington and others in 1919. (Cf. Appendix
 III).


 [23] Established by Adams in 1924. (Cf. p. 132)


PART III: CONSIDERATIONS ON THE UNIVERSE AS A WHOLE


XXX.

COSMOLOGICAL DIFFICULTIES OF NEWTONS THEORY

Part from the difficulty discussed in Section XXI, there is a second
fundamental difficulty attending classical celestial mechanics, which,
to the best of my knowledge, was first discussed in detail by the
astronomer Seeliger. If we ponder over the question as to how the
universe, considered as a whole, is to be regarded, the first answer
that suggests itself to us is surely this: As regards space (and time)
the universe is infinite. There are stars everywhere, so that the
density of matter, although very variable in detail, is nevertheless on
the average everywhere the same. In other words: However far we might
travel through space, we should find everywhere an attenuated swarm of
fixed stars of approrimately the same kind and density.

This view is not in harmony with the theory of Newton. The latter
theory rather requires that the universe should have a kind of centre
in which the density of the stars is a maximum, and that as we proceed
outwards from this centre the group-density of the stars should
diminish, until finally, at great distances, it is succeeded by an
infinite region of emptiness. The stellar universe ought to be a finite
island in the infinite ocean of space.[24]


 [24] _Proof_According to the theory of Newton, the number of lines
 of force which come from infinity and terminate in a mass m is
 proportional to the mass _m_. If, on the average, the mass density 0
 is constant throughout the universe, then a sphere of volume _V_ will
 enclose the average man 0_V_. Thus the number of lines of force
 passing through the surface _F_ of the sphere into its interior is
 proportional to 0_V_. For unit area of the surface of the sphere the
 number of lines of force which enters the sphere is thus proportional
 to 0_V/F_ or to 0_R_. Hence the intensity of the field at the
 surface would ultimately become infinite with increasing radius _R_ of
 the sphere, which is impossible.


This conception is in itself not very satisfactory. It is still less
satisfactory because it leads to the result that the light emitted by
the stars and also individual stars of the stellar system are
perpetually passing out into infinite space, never to return, and
without ever again coming into interaction with other objects of
nature. Such a finite material universe would be destined to become
gradually but systematically impoverished.

In order to escape this dilemma, Seeliger suggested a modification of
Newtons law, in which he assumes that for great distances the force of
attraction between two masses diminishes more rapidly than would result
from the inverse square law. In this way it is possible for the mean
density of matter to be constant everywhere, even to infinity, without
infinitely large gravitational fields being produced. We thus free
ourselves from the distasteful conception that the material universe
ought to possess something of the nature of a centre. Of course we
purchase our emancipation from the fundamental difficulties mentioned,
at the cost of a modification and complication of Newtons law which
has neither empirical nor theoretical foundation. We can imagine
innumerable laws which would serve the same purpose, without our being
able to state a reason why one of them is to be preferred to the
others; for any one of these laws would be founded just as little on
more general theoretical principles as is the law of Newton.


XXXI.

THE POSSIBILITY OF A FINITE AND YET UNBOUNDED UNIVERSE

But speculations on the structure of the universe also move in quite
another direction. The development of non-Euclidean geometry led to the
recognition of the fact, that we can cast doubt on the _infiniteness_
of our space without coming into conflict with the laws of thought or
with experience (Riemann, Helmholtz). These questions have already been
treated in detail and with unsurpassable lucidity by Helmholtz and
Poincar, whereas I can only touch on them briefly here.

In the first place, we imagine an existence in two dimensional space.
Flat beings with flat implements, and in particular flat rigid
measuring-rods, are free to move in a _plane_. For them nothing exists
outside of this plane: that which they observe to happen to themselves
and to their flat things is the all-inclusive reality of their plane.
In particular, the constructions of plane Euclidean geometry can be
carried out by means of the rods _e.g._ the lattice construction,
considered in Section XXIV. In contrast to ours, the universe of these
beings is two-dimensional; but, like ours, it extends to infinity. In
their universe there is room for an infinite number of identical
squares made up of rods, _i.e._ its volume (surface) is infinite. If
these beings say their universe is plane, there is sense in the
statement, because they mean that they can perform the constructions of
plane Euclidean geometry with their rods. In this connection the
individual rods always represent the same distance, independently of
their position.

Let us consider now a second two-dimensional existence, but this time
on a spherical surface instead of on a plane. The flat beings with
their measuring-rods and other objects fit exactly on this surface and
they are unable to leave it. Their whole universe of observation
extends exclusively over the surface of the sphere. Are these beings
able to regard the geometry of their universe as being plane geometry
and their rods withal as the realisation of distance? They cannot do
this. For if they attempt to realise a straight line, they will obtain
a curve, which we three-dimensional beings designate as a great
circle, _i.e._ a self-contained line of definite finite length, which
can be measured up by means of a measuring-rod. Similarly, this
universe has a finite area that can be compared with the area, of a
square constructed with rods. The great charm resulting from this
consideration lies in the recognition of the fact that _the universe of
these beings is finite and yet has no limits._

But the spherical-surface beings do not need to go on a world-tour in
order to perceive that they are not living in a Euclidean universe.
They can convince themselves of this on every part of their world,
provided they do not use too small a piece of it. Starting from a
point, they draw straight lines (arcs of circles as judged in three
dimensional space) of equal length in all directions. They will call
the line joining the free ends of these lines a circle. For a plane
surface, the ratio of the circumference of a circle to its diameter,
both lengths being measured with the same rod, is, according to
Euclidean geometry of the plane, equal to a constant value , which is
independent of the diameter of the circle. On their spherical surface
our flat beings would find for this ratio the value

image036


_i.e._ a smaller value than , the difference being the more
considerable, the greater is the radius of the circle in comparison
with the radius _R_ of the world-sphere. By means of this relation
the spherical beings can determine the radius of their universe
(world), even when only a relatively small part of their worldsphere
is available for their measurements. But if this part is very small
indeed, they will no longer be able to demonstrate that they are on a
spherical world and not on a Euclidean plane, for a small part of a
spherical surface differs only slightly from a piece of a plane of the
same size.

Thus if the spherical surface beings are living on a planet of which
the solar system occupies only a negligibly small part of the spherical
universe, they have no means of determining whether they are living in
a finite or in an infinite universe, because the piece of universe to
which they have access is in both cases practically plane, or
Euclidean. It follows directly from this discussion, that for our
sphere-beings the circumference of a circle first increases with the
radius until the circumference of the universe is reached, and that
it thenceforward gradually decreases to zero for still further
increasing values of the radius. During this process the area of the
circle continues to increase more and more, until finally it becomes
equal to the total area of the whole world-sphere.

Perhaps the reader will wonder why we have placed our beings on a
sphere rather than on another closed surface. But this choice has its
justification in the fact that, of all closed surfaces, the sphere is
unique in possessing the property that all points on it are equivalent.
I admit that the ratio of the circumference _c_ of a circle to its
radius _r_ depends on _r_, but for a given value of _r_ it is the same
for all points of the worldsphere; in other words, the world-sphere
is a surface of constant curvature.

To this two-dimensional sphere-universe there is a three-dimensional
analogy, namely, the three-dimensional spherical space which was
discovered by Riemann. its points are likewise all equivalent. It
possesses a finite volume, which is determined by its radius
(22_R_3). Is it possible to imagine a spherical space? To imagine a
space means nothing else than that we imagine an epitome of our space
experience, _i.e._ of experience that we can have in the movement of
rigid bodies. In this sense we _can_ imagine a spherical space.

Suppose we draw lines or stretch strings in all directions from a
point, and mark off from each of these the distance _r_ with a
measuring-rod. All the free end-points of these lengths lie on a
spherical surface. We can specially measure up the area (_F_) of this
surface by means of a square made up of measuring-rods. If the universe
is Euclidean, then _F_ = 4_r_2; if it is spherical, then _F_ is always
less than 4_r_2. With increasing values of _r, F_ increases from zero
up to a maximum value which is determined by the world-radius, but
for still further increasing values of _r_, the area gradually
diminishes to zero. At first, the straight lines which radiate from the
starting point diverge farther and farther from one another, but later
they approach each other, and finally they run together again at a
counter-point to the starting point. Under such conditions they have
traversed the whole spherical space. It is easily seen that the
three-dimensional spherical space is quite analogous to the
two-dimensional spherical surface. It is finite (_i.e._ of finite
volume), and has no bounds.

It may be mentioned that there is yet another kind of curved space:
elliptical space. It can be regarded as a curved space in which the
two counter-points are identical (indistinguishable from each other).
An elliptical universe can thus be considered to some extent as a
curved universe possessing central symmetry.

It follows from what has been said, that closed spaces without limits
are conceivable. From amongst these, the spherical space (and the
elliptical) excels in its simplicity, since all points on it are
equivalent. As a result of this discussion, a most interesting question
arises for astronomers and physicists, and that is whether the universe
in which we live is infinite, or whether it is finite in the manner of
the spherical universe. Our experience is far from being sufficient to
enable us to answer this question. But the general theory of relativity
permits of our answering it with a moderate degree of certainty, and in
this connection the difficulty mentioned in Section XXX finds its
solution.


XXXII.

THE STRUCTURE OF SPACE ACCORDING TO THE GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY

According to the general theory of relativity, the geometrical
properties of space are not independent, but they are determined by
matter. Thus we can draw conclusions about the geometrical structure of
the universe only if we base our considerations on the state of the
matter as being something that is known. We know from experience that,
for a suitably chosen co-ordinate system, the velocities of the stars
are small as compared with the velocity of transmission of light. We
can thus as a rough approximation arrive at a conclusion as to the
nature of the universe as a whole, if we treat the matter as being at
rest.

We already know from our previous discussion that the behaviour of
measuring-rods and clocks is influenced by gravitational fields, _i.e._
by the distribution of matter. This in itself is sufficient to exclude
the possibility of the exact validity of Euclidean geometry in our
universe. But it is conceivable that our universe differs only slightly
from a Euclidean one, and this notion seems all the more probable,
since calculations show that the metrics of surrounding space is
influenced only to an exceedingly small extent by masses even of the
magnitude of our sun. We might imagine that, as regards geometry, our
universe behaves analogously to a surface which is irregularly curved
in its individual parts, but which nowhere departs appreciably from a
plane: something like the rippled surface of a lake. Such a universe
might fittingly be called a quasi-Euclidean universe. As regards its
space it would be infinite. But calculation shows that in a
quasi-Euclidean universe the average density of matter would
necessarily be _nil_. Thus such a universe could not be inhabited by
matter everywhere; it would present to us that unsatisfactory picture
which we portrayed in Section XXX.

If we are to have in the universe an average density of matter which
differs from zero, however small may be that difference, then the
universe cannot be quasi-Euclidean. On the contrary, the results of
calculation indicate that if matter be distributed uniformly, the
universe would necessarily be spherical (or elliptical). Since in
reality the detailed distribution of matter is not uniform, the real
universe will deviate in individual parts from the spherical, _i.e._
the universe will be quasi-spherical. But it will be necessarily
finite. In fact, the theory supplies us with a simple connection[25]
between the space-expanse of the universe and the average density of
matter in it.


 [25] For the radius _R_ of the universe we obtain the equation


image037


The use of the C.G.S. system in this equation gives 2/k = 1.08 x 1027;
 is the average density of the matter and _k_ is a constant connected
with the Newtonian constant of gravitation.


APPENDICES


APPENDIX I

SIMPLE DERIVATION OF THE LORENTZ TRANSFORMATION

(SUPPLEMENTARY TO SECTION XI)

For the relative orientation of the co-ordinate systems indicated in
Fig. 2, the _x_-axes of both systems permanently coincide. In the
present case we can divide the problem into parts by considering first
only events which are localised on the _x_-axis. Any such event is
represented with respect to the co-ordinate system _K_ by the abscissa
_x_ and the time _t_, and with respect to the system _K_ by the
abscissa _x_ and the time _t_. We require to find _x_ and _t_ when
_x_ and _t_ are given.

A light-signal, which is proceeding along the positive axis of _x_, is
transmitted according to the equation

_x_ = _ct_


or

_x_  _ct_ = 0 . . . . . (1).


Since the same light-signal has to be transmitted relative to _K_ with
the velocity _c_, the propagation relative to the system _K_ will be
represented by the analogous formula

_x_  _ct_ = 0 . . . . . (2)


Those space-time points (events) which satisfy (1) must also satisfy
(2). Obviously this will be the case when the relation

(_x_  _ct_) = (_x_  _ct_) . . . (3).


is fulfilled in general, where  indicates a constant; for, according
to (3), the disappearance of (_x_  _ct_) involves the disappearance of
(_x_  _ct_).

If we apply quite similar considerations to light rays which are being
transmitted along the negative _x_-axis, we obtain the condition

(_x_ + _ct_) = (_x + ct_) . . . (4).


By adding (or subtracting) equations (3) and (4), and introducing for
convenience the constants _a_ and _b_ in place of the constants  and 
where

image038


and

image039


we obtain the equations

image040


We should thus have the solution of our problem, if the constants _a_
and _b_ were known. These result from the following discussion.

For the origin of _K_ we have permanently _x_ = 0, and hence
according to the first of the equations (5)

image041


If we call _v_ the velocity with which the origin of _K_ is moving
relative to _K_, we then have

image042


The same value _v_ can be obtained from equations (5), if we calculate
the velocity of another point of _K_ relative to _K_, or the velocity
(directed towards the negative _x_-axis) of a point of _K_ with respect
to _K_. In short, we can designate _v_ as the relative velocity of the
two systems.

Furthermore, the principle of relativity teaches us that, as judged
from K, the length of a unit measuring-rod which is at rest with
reference to _K_ must be exactly the same as the length, as judged
from _K_, of a unit measuring-rod which is at rest relative to _K_. In
order to see how the points of the _x_-axis appear as viewed from _K_,
we only require to take a snapshot of _K_ from _K_; this means that
we have to insert a particular value of _t_ (time of _K_), _e.g._ _t_ =
0. For this value of _t_ we then obtain from the first of the equations
(5)

_x_ = _ax_


Two points of the _x_-axis which are separated by the distance _x_ =
1 when measured in the _K_ system are thus separated in our
instantaneous photograph by the distance

image043


But if the snapshot be taken from _K_(_t_ = 0), and if we eliminate
_t_ from the equations (5), taking into account the expression (6), we
obtain

image044


From this we conclude that two points on the _x_-axis separated by the
distance 1 (relative to _K_) will be represented on our snapshot by the
distance

image045


But from what has been said, the two snapshots must be identical; hence
_x_ in (7) must be equal to _x_ in (7_a_), so that we obtain

image046


The equations (6) and (7_b_) determine the constants _a_ and _b_. By
inserting the values of these constants in (5), we obtain the first and
the fourth of the equations given in Section XI.

image047


Thus we have obtained the Lorentz transformation for events on the
_x_-axis. It satisfies the condition

_x_2  _c_2_t_2 = _x_2  _c_2_t_2 . . . . . . (8a).


The extension of this result, to include events which take place
outside the _x_-axis, is obtained by retaining equations (8) and
supplementing them by the relations

image048


In this way we satisfy the postulate of the constancy of the velocity
of light _in vacuo_ for rays of light of arbitrary direction, both for
the system _K_ and for the system _K_. This may be shown in the
following manner.

We suppose a light-signal sent out from the origin of _K_ at the time
_t_ = 0. It will be propagated according to the equation

image049


or, if we square this equation, according to the equation

_x_2 + _y_2 + _z_2  _c_2_t_2 = 0 . . . . . (10).


It is required by the law of propagation of light, in conjunction with
the postulate of relativity, that the transmission of the signal in
question should take placeas judged from _K_in accordance with the
corresponding formula

_r_ = _ct_


or,

_x_2 + _y_2 + _z_2  _c_2_t_2 = 0 . . . . . . (10_a_).


In order that equation (10_a_) may be a consequence of equation (10),
we must have

_x_2 + _y_2 + _z_2  _c_2_t_2 =  (_x_2 + _y_2 + _z_2  _c_2_t_2)
(11).


Since equation (8_a_) must hold for points on the _x_-axis, we thus
have  = 1. It is easily seen that the Lorentz transformation really
satisfies equation (11) for  = 1; for (11) is a consequence of (8_a_)
and (9), and hence also of (8) and (9). We have thus derived the
Lorentz transformation.

The Lorentz transformation represented by (8) and (9) still requires to
be generalised. Obviously it is immaterial whether the axes of _K_ be
chosen so that they are spatially parallel to those of _K_. It is also
not essential that the velocity of translation of _K_ with respect to
_K_ should be in the direction of the _x_-axis. A simple consideration
shows that we are able to construct the Lorentz transformation in this
general sense from two kinds of transformations, viz. from Lorentz
transformations in the special sense and from purely spatial
transformations. which corresponds to the replacement of the
rectangular co-ordinate system by a new system with its axes pointing
in other directions.

Mathematically, we can characterise the generalised Lorentz
transformation thus:

It expresses _x, y, x, t_, in terms of linear homogeneous functions
of _x, y, x, t_, of such a kind that the relation

_x_2 + _y_2 + _z_2  _c_2_t_2 = _x_2 + _y_2 + _z_2  _c_2_t_2
(11_a_).


is satisficd identically. That is to say: If we substitute their
expressions in _x, y, x, t_, in place of _x, y, x, t_, on the
left-hand side, then the left-hand side of (11_a_) agrees with the
right-hand side.


APPENDIX II

MINKOWSKIS FOUR-DIMENSIONAL SPACE (WORLD)

(SUPPLEMENTARY TO SECTION XVII)

We can characterise the Lorentz transformation still more simply if we
introduce the imaginary

image031


in place of _t_, as time-variable. If, in accordance with this, we
insert

image050


and similarly for the accented system _K_, then the condition which is
identically satisfied by the transformation can be expressed thus:

_x_12 + _x_22 + _x_32 + _x_42 = _x_12 + _x_22 + _x_32 + _x_42 (12).


That is, by the afore-mentioned choice of coordinates, (11_a_) [see
the end of Appendix II] is transformed into this equation.

We see from (12) that the imaginary time co-ordinate _x_4, enters into
the condition of transformation in exactly the same way as the space
co-ordinates _x_1, _x_2, _x_3. It is due to this fact that, according
to the theory of relativity, the time _x_4, enters into natural laws
in the same form as the space co ordinates _x_1, _x_2, _x_3.

A four-dimensional continuum described by the co-ordinates _x_1,
_x_2, _x_3, _x_4, was called world by Minkowski, who also termed a
point-event a world-point. From a happening in three-dimensional
space, physics becomes, as it were, an existence in the
four-dimensional world.

This four-dimensional world bears a close similarity to the
three-dimensional space of (Euclidean) analytical geometry. If we
introduce into the latter a new Cartesian co-ordinate system (_x_1,
_x_2, _x_3) with the same origin, then _x_1, _x_2, _x_3, are
linear homogeneous functions of _x_1, _x_2, _x_3 which identically
satisfy the equation

_x_12 + _x_22 + _x_32 = _x_12 + _x_22 + _x_32


The analogy with (12) is a complete one. We can regard Minkowskis
world in a formal manner as a four-dimensional Euclidean space (with
an imaginary time coordinate); the Lorentz transformation corresponds
to a rotation of the co-ordinate system in the four-dimensional
world.


APPENDIX III

THE EXPERIMENTAL CONFIRMATION OF THE GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY

From a systematic theoretical point of view, we may imagine the process
of evolution of an empirical science to be a continuous process of
induction. Theories are evolved and are expressed in short compass as
statements of a large number of individual observations in the form of
empirical laws, from which the general laws can be ascertained by
comparison. Regarded in this way, the development of a science bears
some resemblance to the compilation of a classified catalogue. It is,
as it were, a purely empirical enterprise.

But this point of view by no means embraces the whole of the actual
process; for it slurs over the important part played by intuition and
deductive thought in the development of an exact science. As soon as a
science has emerged from its initial stages, theoretical advances are
no longer achieved merely by a process of arrangement. Guided by
empirical data, the investigator rather develops a system of thought
which, in general, is built up logically from a small number of
fundamental assumptions, the so-called axioms. We call such a system of
thought a _theory_. The theory finds the justification for its
existence in the fact that it correlates a large number of single
observations, and it is just here that the truth of the theory lies.

Corresponding to the same complex of empirical data, there may be
several theories, which differ from one another to a considerable
extent. But as regards the deductions from the theories which are
capable of being tested, the agreement between the theories may be so
complete that it becomes difficult to find any deductions in which the
two theories differ from each other. As an example, a case of general
interest is available in the province of biology, in the Darwinian
theory of the development of species by selection in the struggle for
existence, and in the theory of development which is based on the
hypothesis of the hereditary transmission of acquired characters.

We have another instance of far-reaching agreement between the
deductions from two theories in Newtonian mechanics on the one hand,
and the general theory of relativity on the other. This agreement goes
so far, that up to the present we have been able to find only a few
deductions from the general theory of relativity which are capable of
investigation, and to which the physics of pre-relativity days does not
also lead, and this despite the profound difference in the fundamental
assumptions of the two theories. In what follows, we shall again
consider these important deductions, and we shall also discuss the
empirical evidence appertaining to them which has hitherto been
obtained.

(_a_) Motion of the Perihelion of Mercury

According to Newtonian mechanics and Newtons law of gravitation, a
planet which is revolving round the sun would describe an ellipse round
the latter, or, more correctly, round the common centre of gravity of
the sun and the planet. In such a system, the sun, or the common centre
of gravity, lies in one of the foci of the orbital ellipse in such a
manner that, in the course of a planet-year, the distance sun-planet
grows from a minimum to a maximum, and then decreases again to a
minimum. If instead of Newtons law we insert a somewhat different law
of attraction into the calculation, we find that, according to this new
law, the motion would still take place in such a manner that the
distance sun-planet exhibits periodic variations; but in this case the
angle described by the line joining sun and planet during such a period
(from perihelionclosest proximity to the sunto perihelion) would
differ from 360. The line of the orbit would not then be a closed one
but in the course of time it would fill up an annular part of the
orbital plane, viz. between the circle of least and the circle of
greatest distance of the planet from the sun.

According also to the general theory of relativity, which differs of
course from the theory of Newton, a small variation from the
Newton-Kepler motion of a planet in its orbit should take place, and in
such away, that the angle described by the radius sun-planet between
one perhelion and the next should exceed that corresponding to one
complete revolution by an amount given by

image051


(_N.B._One complete revolution corresponds to the angle 2 in the
absolute angular measure customary in physics, and the above expression
given the amount by which the radius sun-planet exceeds this angle
during the interval between one perihelion and the next.) In this
expression _a_ represents the major semi-axis of the ellipse, _e_ its
eccentricity, _c_ the velocity of light, and _T_ the period of
revolution of the planet. Our result may also be stated as follows:
According to the general theory of relativity, the major axis of the
ellipse rotates round the sun in the same sense as the orbital motion
of the planet. Theory requires that this rotation should amount to 43
seconds of arc per century for the planet Mercury, but for the other
Planets of our solar system its magnitude should be so small that it
would necessarily escape detection.[26]


 [26] Especially since the next planet Venus has an orbit that is
 almost an exact circle, which makes it more difficult to locate the
 perihelion with precision.


In point of fact, astronomers have found that the theory of Newton does
not suffice to calculate the observed motion of Mercury with an
exactness corresponding to that of the delicacy of observation
attainable at the present time. After taking account of all the
disturbing influences exerted on Mercury by the remaining planets, it
was found (Leverrier: 1859; and Newcomb: 1895) that an unexplained
perihelial movement of the orbit of Mercury remained over, the amount
of which does not differ sensibly from the above mentioned +43 seconds
of arc per century. The uncertainty of the empirical result amounts to
a few seconds only.

(_b_) Deflection of Light by a Gravitational Field

image052


In Section XXII it has been already mentioned that according to the
general theory of relativity, a ray of light will experience a
curvature of its path when passing through a gravitational field, this
curvature being similar to that experienced by the path of a body which
is projected through a gravitational field. As a result of this theory,
we should expect that a ray of light which is passing close to a
heavenly body would be deviated towards the latter. For a ray of light
which passes the sun at a distance of  sun-radii from its centre, the
angle of deflection () should amount to

image053


It may be added that, according to the theory, half of this deflection
is produced by the Newtonian field of attraction of the sun, and the
other half by the geometrical modification (curvature) of space
caused by the sun.

This result admits of an experimental test by means of the photographic
registration of stars during a total eclipse of the sun. The only
reason why we must wait for a total eclipse is because at every other
time the atmosphere is so strongly illuminated by the light from the
sun that the stars situated near the suns disc are invisible. The
predicted effect can be seen clearly from the accompanying diagram. If
the sun (_S_) were not present, a star which is practically infinitely
distant would be seen in the direction _D_1, as observed front the
earth. But as a consequence of the deflection of light from the star by
the sun, the star will be seen in the direction _D_2, _i.e._ at a
somewhat greater distance from the centre of the sun than corresponds
to its real position.

In practice, the question is tested in the following way. The stars in
the neighbourhood of the sun are photographed during a solar eclipse.

In addition, a second photograph of the same stars is taken when the
sun is situated at another position in the sky, _i.e._ a few months
earlier or later. As compared with the standard photograph, the
positions of the stars on the eclipse-photograph ought to appear
displaced radially outwards (away from the centre of the sun) by an
amount corresponding to the angle _a_.

We are indebted to the [British] Royal Society and to the Royal
Astronomical Society for the investigation of this important deduction.
Undaunted by the [first world] war and by difficulties of both a
material and a psychological nature aroused by the war, these societies
equipped two expeditionsto Sobral (Brazil), and to the island of
Principe (West Africa)and sent several of Britains most celebrated
astronomers (Eddington, Cottingham, Crommelin, Davidson), in order to
obtain photographs of the solar eclipse of 29th May, 1919. The relative
discrepancies to be expected between the stellar photographs obtained
during the eclipse and the comparison photographs amounted to a few
hundredths of a millimetre only. Thus great accuracy was necessary in
making the adjustments required for the taking of the photographs, and
in their subsequent measurement.

The results of the measurements confirmed the theory in a thoroughly
satisfactory manner. The rectangular components of the observed and of
the calculated deviations of the stars (in seconds of arc) are set
forth in the following table of results:

image054


(_c_) Displacement of Spectral Lines Towards the Red

In Section XXIII it has been shown that in a system _K_ which is in
rotation with regard to a Galileian system _K_, clocks of identical
construction, and which are considered at rest with respect to the
rotating reference-body, go at rates which are dependent on the
positions of the clocks. We shall now examine this dependence
quantitatively. A clock, which is situated at a distance r from the
centre of the disc, has a velocity relative to _K_ which is given by

_v_ = _r_,


where  represents the angular velocity of rotation of the disc _K_
with respect to _K_. If _v_0, represents the number of ticks of the
clock per unit time (rate of the clock) relative to _K_ when the
clock is at rest, then the rate of the clock (_v_) when it is moving
relative to _K_ with a velocity _v_, but at rest with respect to the
disc, will, in accordance with Section XII, be given by

image055


or with sufficient accuracy by

image056


This expression may also be stated in the following form:

image057


If we represent the difference of potential of the centrifugal force
between the position of the clock and the centre of the disc by ,
_i.e._ the work, considered negatively, which must be performed on the
unit of mass against the centrifugal force in order to transport it
from the position of the clock on the rotating disc to the centre of
the disc, then we have

image058


From this it follows that

image059


In the first place, we see from this expression that two clocks of
identical construction will go at different rates when situated at
different distances from the centre of the disc. This result is also
valid from the standpoint of an observer who is rotating with the disc.

Now, as judged from the disc, the latter is in a gravitational field of
potential , hence the result we have obtained will hold quite
generally for gravitational fields. Furthermore, we can regard an atom
which is emitting spectral lines as a clock, so that the following
statement will hold:

_An atom absorbs or emits light of a frequency which is dependent on
the potential of the gravitational field in which it is situated._

The frequency of an atom situated on the surface of a heavenly body
will be somewhat less than the frequency of an atom of the same element
which is situated in free space (or on the surface of a smaller
celestial body).

Now  =  _K (M/r)_, where _K_ is Newtons constant of gravitation, and
_M_ is the mass of the heavenly body. Thus a displacement towards the
red ought to take place for spectral lines produced at the surface of
stars as compared with the spectral lines of the same element produced
at the surface of the earth, the amount of this displacement being

image060


For the sun, the displacement towards the red predicted by theory
amounts to about two millionths of the wave-length. A trustworthy
calculation is not possible in the case of the stars, because in
general neither the mass _M_ nor the radius _r_ are known.

It is an open question whether or not this effect exists, and at the
present time (1920) astronomers are working with great zeal towards the
solution. Owing to the smallness of the effect in the case of the sun,
it is difficult to form an opinion as to its existence. Whereas Grebe
and Bachem (Bonn), as a result of their own measurements and those of
Evershed and Schwarzschild on the cyanogen bands, have placed the
existence of the effect almost beyond doubt, while other investigators,
particularly St. John, have been led to the opposite opinion in
consequence of their measurements.

Mean displacements of lines towards the less refrangible end of the
spectrum are certainly revealed by statistical investigations of the
fixed stars; but up to the present the examination of the available
data does not allow of any definite decision being arrived at, as to
whether or not these displacements are to be referred in reality to the
effect of gravitation. The results of observation have been collected
together, and discussed in detail from the standpoint of the question
which has been engaging our attention here, in a paper by E. Freundlich
entitled Zur Prfung der allgemeinen Relativitts-Theorie (_Die
Naturwissenschaften_, 1919, No. 35, p. 520: Julius Springer, Berlin).

At all events, a definite decision will be reached during the next few
years. If the displacement of spectral lines towards the red by the
gravitational potential does not exist, then the general theory of
relativity will be untenable. On the other hand, if the cause of the
displacement of spectral lines be definitely traced to the
gravitational potential, then the study of this displacement will
furnish us with important information as to the mass of the heavenly
bodies.[27]


 [27] The displacement of spectral lines towards the red end of the
 spectrum was definitely established by Adams in 1924, by observations
 on the dense companion of Sirius, for which the effect is about thirty
 times greater than for the Sun. R.W.L.translator


APPENDIX IV

THE STRUCTURE OF SPACE ACCORDING TO THE GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY

(SUPPLEMENTARY TO SECTION XXXII)

Since the publication of the first edition of this little book, our
knowledge about the structure of space in the large (cosmological
problem) has had an important development, which ought to be mentioned
even in a popular presentation of the subject.

My original considerations on the subject were based on two hypotheses:

(1) There exists an average density of matter in the whole of space
which is everywhere the same and different from zero.

(2) The magnitude (radius) of space is independent of time.

Both these hypotheses proved to be consistent, according to the general
theory of relativity, but only after a hypothetical term was added to
the field equations, a term which was not required by the theory as
such nor did it seem natural from a theoretical point of view
(cosmological term of the field equations).

Hypothesis (2) appeared unavoidable to me at the time, since I thought
that one would get into bottomless speculations if one departed from
it.

However, already in the twenties, the Russian mathematician Friedman
showed that a different hypothesis was natural from a purely
theoretical point of view. He realized that it was possible to preserve
hypothesis (1) without introducing the less natural cosmological term
into the field equations of gravitation, if one was ready to drop
hypothesis (2). Namely, the original field equations admit a solution
in which the world radius depends on time (expanding space). In that
sense one can say, according to Friedman, that the theory demands an
expansion of space.

A few years later Hubble showed, by a special investigation of the
extra-galactic nebulae (milky ways), that the spectral lines emitted
showed a red shift which increased regularly with the distance of the
nebulae. This can be interpreted in regard to our present knowledge
only in the sense of Dopplers principle, as an expansive motion of the
system of stars in the largeas required, according to Friedman, by the
field equations of gravitation. Hubbles discovery can, therefore, be
considered to some extent as a confirmation of the theory.

There does arise, however, a strange difficulty. The interpretation of
the galactic line-shift discovered by Hubble as an expansion (which can
hardly be doubted from a theoretical point of view), leads to an origin
of this expansion which lies only about 109 years ago, while physical
astronomy makes it appear likely that the development of individual
stars and systems of stars takes considerably longer. It is in no way
known how this incongruity is to be overcome.

I further want to remark that the theory of expanding space, together
with the empirical data of astronomy, permit no decision to be reached
about the finite or infinite character of (three-dimensional) space,
while the original static hypothesis of space yielded the closure
(finiteness) of space.

_K_ = co-ordinate system

_x, y_ = two-dimensional co-ordinates

_x, y, z_ = three-dimensional co-ordinates

_x, y, z, t_ = four-dimensional co-ordinates

_t_ = time

_I_ = distance

_v_ = velocity

_F_ = force

_G_ = gravitational field
</article>
<article name="R.U.R.">
Karel apek

R.U.R.

(Rossums Universal Robots)

Kolektivn drama o vstupn komedii a tech djstvch



OSOBY



Harry Domin: centrln editel Rossumovch Univerzlnch Robot
In. Fabry: generln technick editel R.U.R.
Dr. Gall: pednosta fyziologickho a vzkumnho oddlen R.U.R.
Dr. Hallemeier: pednosta stavu pro psychologii a vchovu robot R.U.R
Konzul Busman: generln komern editel R.U.R.
Stavitel Alquist: f staveb R.U.R.
Helena Gloryov
Nna: jej chva
Marius: Robot
Sulla: Robotka
Radius: Robot
Damon: Robot
1. Robot
2. Robot
3. Robot
4. Robot
Primus: Robot
Helena: Robotka
Robotsk sluha
a etn Roboti

Domin: v pedehe asi osmaticetilet, vysok, oholen

Fabry: rovn oholen, plav, vn a jemn tve

Dr. Gall: drobn, iv, snd, s ernm knrem

Hallemeier: ohromn, hmotn, se zrzavm anglickm knrem a zrzavm
    kartem vlas

Busman: tlust, pleat, krtkozrak id

Alquist: star ne ostatn, nedbale obleen, dlouhch, proedivlch
    vlas a vous

Helena: velmi elegantn

Ve vlastn he vichni o deset let star.

Roboti v pedehe obleeni jako lid. Jsou sen v pohybech i
vslovnosti, bezvraznch tv, upenho pohledu. Ve vlastn he maj
pltn blzy v pasu staen emenem a na prsou mosazn slo.

Po pedehe a druhm aktu pestvka.




Pedehra



stedn kancel tovrny Rossum s Universal Robots. Vpravo vchod. Okny
v preln stn pohled na nekonen ady tovrnch budov. Vlevo dal
editelsk mstnosti.

Domin: (sed u velikho americkho psacho stolu v otecm kesle. Na
    stole rovka, telefon, ttka, poada dopis, atd., na stn vlevo
    velik mapy s lodnmi a elezninmi liniemi, velik kalend, hodiny,
    je ukazuj nco mlo ped polednem; na stn vpravo titn plakty:
    "Nejlacinj prce: Rossumovi Roboti" "Tropit Roboti, nov vynlez.
    Kus 150 d." "Kad si kup svho Robota!" "Chcete zlevnit svoje
    vrobky? Objednejte si Rossumovy Roboty." Dle jin mapy, dopravn
    lodn d, tabulka s telegrafickmi zznamy kurs atd. V kontrastu k
    tto vzdob stn je na zemi ndhern tureck koberec, vpravo kulat
    stl, pohovka, koen klubovn kesla a knihovna, v n msto knih
    stoj lhve s vnem a koalkami. Vlevo pokladna. Vedle Dominova stolu
    psac stroj, na nm pe dvka Sulla.)

Domin: (diktuje) "--e nerume za zbo pokozen dopravou. Upozornili
    jsme vaeho kapitna hned pi nakldn, e lo je nezpsobil k
    doprav Robot, take zkza nkladu nepad na n et. Znamenme se--
    za Rossum s Universal Robots--" Hotovo?

Sulla: Ano.

Domin: Nov list. Friedrichswerke, Hamburk.--Datum.--"Potvrzujeme
    objednvku patnct tisc Robot--" (zazvon domc telefon. Domin jej
    zvedne a mluv do nho) Hal--Zde centrln--ano.--Zajist. Ale
    ano, jako vdycky.--Ovem, kabelujte jim.--Dobr--(zavs telefon)
    Kde jsem pestal?

Sulla: Potvrzujeme objednvku na patnct tisc R.

Domin: (zamylen) Patnct tisc R. Patnct tisc R.

Marius: (vstoup) Pane editeli, njak dma pros--

Domin: Kdo?

Marius: Nevm. Podv vizitku.

Domin: (te) Prezident Glory.--e prosm.

Marius: (oteve dvee) Rate, pan.

(vejde Helena Gloryov. Marius odejde)

Domin: (vstane) Rate.

Helena: Pan centrln editel Domin?

Domin: Prosm.

Helena: Jdi k vm--

Domin:--s lstkem prezidenta Gloryho. To sta.

Helena: Prezident Glory je mj otec. Jsem Helena Gloryov.

Domin: Sleno Gloryov, je pro ns neobyejnou ct, e--e--

Helena:--e vm nememe ukzat dvee.

Domin:--e smme pozdravit dceru velkho prezidenta. Prosm, posate se.
    Sullo, mete odejt. (Sulla odejde)

Domin: (usedne) m mohu poslouit, sleno Gloryov?

Helena: J jsem pijela--

Domin:--podvat se na nai tovrn vrobu lid. Jako vechny nvtvy.
    Prosm, beze veho.

Helena: Myslela jsem, e je zakzno--

Domin:--vstoupit do tovrny, ovem. Jene kad sem pijde s n
    vizitkou, sleno Gloryov.

Helena: A vy ukete kadmu ... ?

Domin: Jen nco. Vroba umlch lid, sleno, je tovrn tajemstv.

Helena: Pro mne nenechte domluvit?

Domin: Prosm za prominut. Chtla jste snad ci nco jinho?

Helena: Chtla jsem se jen zeptat--

Domin:--zda bych vm zcela vjimen neukzal nai tovrnu. Ale zajist,
    sleno Gloryov.

Helena: Jak vte, e jsem se na to chtla ptt?

Domin: Vichni se ptaj stejn. Vstane. Ze zvltn cty, sleno, vm
    ukeme vc ne jinm a--jednm slovem--

Helena: Dkuji vm.

Domin: Zavete-li se, e nikomu neprozradte ani to nejmen--

Helena: (vstane a podv mu ruku) M estn slovo.

Domin: Dkuji. Nechtla byste snad sejmout zvoj?

Helena: Ach ovem, vy chcete vidt--Promite.

Domin: Prosm?

Helena: Kdybyste mi pustil ruku.

Domin: (pust) Prosm za prominut.

Helena: (snm zvoj) Chcete vidt, nejsem-li vyzvda. Jak jste opatrn.

Domin: (pozoruje ji naden) Hm--ovem--my--tak jest.

Helena: Vy mi nedvujete?

Domin: Neobyejn, sleno hele--pardon, sleno Gloryov. Vskutku
    neobyejn poten--Mla jste dobrou plavbu?

Helena: Ano. Pro--

Domin: Protoe--mnm toti--e jste jet velmi mlad.

Helena: Pjdeme hned do tovrny?

Domin: Ano. Myslm dvaadvacet, ne?

Helena: Dvaadvacet eho?

Domin: Let.

Helena: Jedenadvacet. Pro to chcete vdt?

Domin: Protoe--ponvad--(s nadenm) Zdrte se dle, e ano?

Helena: Podle toho, co mi ukete z vroby.

Domin: ertova vroba! Ale zajist, sleno Gloryov, vechno uvidte.
    Prosm, posate se. Zajmala by vs historie vynlezu?

Helena: Ano, prosm vs. (usedne)

Domin: Tak tedy. (sedne si na psac stl, pozoruje Helenu uchvcen a
    odkv rychle) Bylo to roku 1920 kdy se star Rossum velik filozof
    ale tehdy jet mlad uenec odebral na tento dalek ostrov aby
    studoval mosk ivoistvo teka. Pitom se pokouel napodobit
    chemickou syntzou ivou hmotu eenou protoplazma a najednou objevil
    ltku kter se chovala naprosto jako iv hmota a byla jinho
    chemickho sloen to bylo roku 1932, prv tyi sta tyicet let po
    objeven Ameriky, uf.

Helena: To umte zpamti?

Domin: Ano; fyziologie, sleno Gloryov, nen mm emeslem. Tak dl?

Helena: Teba.

Domin: (slavnostn) A tehdy, sleno, star Rossum napsal mezi sv chemick
    vzorce tohleto: "Proda nala jeden zpsob, jak organizovat ivou
    hmotu. Je vak jin zpsob, jednodu, tvrnj a rychlej, na nj
    proda vbec nenarazila. Tuto druhou cestu, po kter se mohl brt
    vvoj ivota, jsem dnenho dne objevil." Pedstavte si, sleno, e
    tahle velik slova psal nad chrchlem jakhosi koloidlnho rosolu,
    kter by ani pes neseral. Pedstavte si ho, e sed nad zkumavkou a
    mysl na to, jak z n vyroste cel strom ivota, jak z n budou
    vychzet vechna zvata, ponajc vnkem a konc--konc
    samotnm lovkem. lovk z jin ltky, ne jsme my. Sleno Gloryov,
    to byl ohromn okamik.

Helena: Tak dl.

Domin: Dl? Te lo o to, dostat ivot ze zkumavky ven a zrychlit vvoj a
    utvoit njak ty orgny, kosti a nervy a kdesi cosi a nalzt jaksi
    takov ltky, katalyztory, enzymy, hormny a tak dle, zkrtka,
    rozumte tomu?

Helena: N--n--nevm. Myslm, e jen mlo.

Domin: J docela nic. Vte, pomoc tch vodiek mohl dlat, co chtl. Mohl
    teba dostat medzu se sokratovskm mozkem nebo alu padest metr
    dlouhou. Ale protoe neml kousku humoru, vzal si do hlavy, e udl
    normlnho obratlovce nebo snad lovka. A tak se do toho pustil.

Helena: Do eho?

Domin: Do napodoben prody. Nejdv zkusil udlat umlho psa. Stlo ho
    to adu let, vylo z toho cosi jako zakrnl tele a polo to za pr
    dn. Uku vm to v muzeu. A pak u se dal star Rossum do vytven
    lovka.

(Pauza)

Helena: A to nesmm nikomu prozradit?

Domin: Nikomu na svt.

Helena: koda, e u je to ve vech tankch.

Domin: koda. Sesko ze stolu a usedne vedle Heleny. Ale vte, co v
    tankch nen? uk si na elo. e byl star Rossum asn blzen.
    Vn, sleno Gloryov, ale tohle nechte pro sebe. Ten star
    vstednk chtl opravdu dlat lidi.

Helena: Ale vdy vy dlte lidi!

Domin: Piblin, sleno Heleno. Ale star Rossum to mnil doslovn. Vte,
    chtl jaksi vdecky sesadit Boha. Byl straliv materialista, a proto
    to vechno dlal. Nelo mu o nic vc ne podat dkaz, e nebylo
    dnho Pnaboha zapoteb. Proto si umanul udlat lovka navlas,
    jako jsme my. Znte trochu anatomii?

Helena: Jen--docela mlo.

Domin: J tak. Pedstavte si, e si vzal do hlavy vyrobit vechno do
    posledn lzy jako v lidskm tle. Slep stevo, mandle, pupek, sam
    zbytenosti. Dokonce i--hm--i pohlavn lzy.

Helena: Ale ty pece--ty pece--

Domin:--nejsou zbyten, j vm. Ale maj-li se lid umle vyrbt, pak
    nen--hm--nijak teba--

Helena: Rozumm.

Domin: Uku vm v muzeu, co spackal za deset let dohromady. Ml to bt
    mu, ilo to cel ti dny. Star Rossum neml trochy vkusu. Bylo to
    hrozn. Bylo to hrozn, co udlal. Ale mlo to uvnit vechno, co m
    lovk. Skuten, asn piplav prce. A tehdy sem piel inenr
    Rossum, synovec starho. Geniln hlava, sleno Gloryov. Jak uvidl,
    co trop star, ekl: "To je nesmysl, vyrbt lovka deset let.
    Nebude-li ho vyrbt rychleji ne proda, pak na ten cel krm
    nakalat." A pustil se sm do anatomie.

Helena: V tankch je to jinak.

Domin: (vstane) V tankch je placen reklama a ostatn nesmysl. Stoj
    tam napklad, e Roboty vynalezl star pn. Zatm e star pn hodil
    na univerzitu, ale o tovrn vrob neml pont. Myslel, e udl
    skuten lidi, tedy snad njak nov Indiny, docenty nebo idioty,
    vte? A teprve mlad Rossum ml npad udlat z toho iv a
    inteligentn pracovn stroje. Co je v tankch o spoluprci obou
    velikch Rossum, je povdaka. Ti dva se ukrutn hdali. Star
    ateista neml drobet pochopen pro industrii, a konen ho mlad
    zavel do njak laboratoe, aby se tam piplal se svmi velikmi
    potraty, a zaal to vyprvt sm, po inenrsku. Star Rossum ho
    doslovn proklel a do sv smrti usmolil jet dv fyziologick obludy,
    a ho nakonec nali v laboratoi mrtvho. To je cel historie.

Helena: A co tedy mlad?

Domin: Mlad Rossum, sleno, to byl nov vk. Vk vroby po vku poznn.
    Kdy si okoukl anatomii lovka, vidl hned, e je to pli sloit a
    e by to dobr inenr udlal jednodueji. Zaal tedy pedlvat
    anatomii a zkouel, co se d vynechat nebo zjednoduit--Zkrtka,
    sleno Gloryov, nenud vs to?

Helena: Ne, naopak, je to hrozn zajmav.

Domin: Tak tedy mlad Rossum si ekl: lovk, to je nco, co dejme tomu
    ct radost, hraje na housle, chce jt na prochzku a vbec potebuje
    dlat spoustu vc, kter--kter jsou vlastn zbyten.

Helena: Oho!

Domin: Pokejte. Kter jsou zbyten, kdy m teba tkt nebo stat.
    Naftov motor nem mt tapce a ornamenty, sleno Gloryov. A vyrbt
    uml dlnky je stejn jako vyrbt naftov motory. Vroba m bt co
    nejjednodu a vrobek prakticky nejlep. Co myslte, jak dlnk je
    prakticky nejlep?

Helena: Nejlep? Snad ten, kter--kter--Kdy je poctiv--a oddan.

Domin: Ne, ale ten nejlacinj. Ten, kter m nejm poteb. Mlad Rossum
    vynalezl dlnka s nejmenm potem poteb. Musel ho zjednoduit.
    Vyhodil vechno, co neslou pmo prci. Tm vlastn vyhodil lovka
    a udlal Robota. Drah sleno Gloryov, Roboti nejsou lid. Jsou
    mechanicky dokonalej ne my, maj asnou rozumovou inteligenci, ale
    nemaj dui. , sleno Gloryov, vrobek inenra je technicky
    vytbenj ne vrobek prody.

Helena: k se, e lovk je vrobek bo.

Domin: Tm h. Bh neml ani pont o modern technice. Vila byste, e
    si nebotk mlad Rossum zahrl na Boha?

Helena: Jak, prosm vs?

Domin: Zaal vyrbt Nadroboty. Pracovn obry. Zkusil to s postavami
    tymetrovmi, ale to byste nevila, jak se ti mamuti lmali.

Helena: Lmali?

Domin: Ano. Z nieho nic jim praskla noha nebo nco. Nae planeta je
    patrn trochu mal pro obry. Te dlme jen Roboty pirozen velikosti
    a velmi slun lidsk pravy.

Helena: Vidla jsem prvn Roboty u ns. Obec je koupila ... chci ci
    vzala do prce--

Domin: Koupila, drah sleno. Roboti se kupuj.

Helena:--zskala jako metae. Vidla jsem je mst. Jsou tak divn, tak
    ti.

Domin: Vidla jste mou psaku?

Helena: Nevimla jsem si.

Domin: (zvon) Vte, akciov tovrna Rossumovch Univerzlnch Robot
    dosud nevyrb jednotn zbo. Mme jemnj a hrub Roboty. Ti lep
    budou snad t dvacet let.

Helena: Pak hynou?

Domin: Ano, opotebuj se.

(vstoup Sulla)

Domin: Sullo, ukate se slen Gloryov.

Helena: (vstane a podv j ruku) T mne. Je vm asi hrozn smutno tak
    daleko od svta, vite?

Sulla: To neznm, sleno Gloryov. Rate usednout, prosm.

Helena: (usedne) Odkud jste, sleno?

Sulla: Odtud, z tovrny.

Helena: Ach, vy jste se narodila tady?

Sulla: Ano, byla jsem tu udlna.

Helena: (vysko) Coe?

Domin: (smje se) Sulla nen lovk, sleno, Sulla je Robot.

Helena: Prosm za odputn--

Domin: (polo ruku Sulle na rameno) Sulla se nehnv. Podvejte se,
    sleno Gloryov, jakou dlme ple. Shnte j na tv.

Helena: Oh, ne, ne!

Domin: Nepoznala byste, e je z jin ltky ne my. Prosm, m i typick
    chm blondnek. Jen oi jsou drobtko--Ale zato vlasy! Obrate se,
    Sullo!

Helena: Pestate u!

Domin: Pohovote s hostem, Sullo. Je to vzcn nvtva.

Sulla: Prosm, sleno, posate se. (ob usednou) Mla jste dobrou plavbu?

Helena: Ano--za--zajist.

Sulla: Nevracejte se po Amlii, Sleno Gloryov. Barometr siln kles, na
    705. Pokejte na Pensylvnii, to je velmi dobr, velmi siln lo.

Domin: Kolik?

Sulla: Dvacet uzl za hodinu. Ton dvanct tisc.

Domin: (smje se) Dost, Sullo, dost. Ukate nm, jak umte francouzsky.

Helena: Vy umte francouzsky?

Sulla: Umm tyi jazyky. Pi Dear Sir! Monsieur! Geehrter Herr! Ctn
    pane!

Helena: (vysko) To je humbuk! Vy jste arlatn! Sulla nen Robot, Sulla
    je dve jako j! Sullo, to je hanebn--pro hrajete takovou komedii?

Sulla: J jsem Robot.

Helena: ne, ne, vy lete! Oh, Sullo, odpuste, j vm--donutili vs,
    abyste jim dlala reklamu! Sullo, vy jste dve jako j, e? eknte!

Domin: Lituji, sleno Gloryov. Sulla je Robot.

Helena: Vy lete!

Domin: (vzty se) Jake?--(zazvon) Promite, sleno, pak vs musm
    pesvdit.

(vejde Marius)

Domin: Marie, dovete Sullu do pitevny, aby ji oteveli. Rychle!

Helena: Kam?

Domin: Do pitevny. A j rozznou, pjdete se na n podvat.

Helena: Nepjdu.

Domin: Pardon, mluvila jste o li.

Helena: Vy ji chcete dt zabt?

Domin: Stroje se nezabjej.

Helena: (obejme Sullu) Nebojte se, Sullo, j vs nedm! eknte,
    drahouku, jsou k vm vichni tak surov? To se nesmte dt lbit,
    slyte? Nesmte, Sullo!

Sulla: J jsem Robot.

Helena: To je jedno. Roboti jsou stejn dob lid jako my. Sullo, vy
    byste se nechala rozznout?

Sulla: Ano.

Helena: Oh, vy se nebojte smrti?

Sulla: Neznm, sleno Gloryov.

Helena: Vte, co by se pak s vmi stalo?

Sulla: Ano, pestala bych se hbat.

Helena: To je hrrozn!

Domin: Marie, eknte slen co jste.

Marius: Robot Marius.

Domin: Dal byste Sullu do pitevny?

Marius: Ano.

Domin: Nelitoval byste j?

Marius: Neznm.

Domin: Co by se s n stalo?

Marius: Pestala by se hbat. Dali by ji do stoupy.

Domin: To je smrt, Marie. Bojte se smrti?

Marius: Ne.

Domin: Tak vidte, sleno Gloryov. Roboti nelp na ivot. Nemaj toti
    m. Nemaj poitk. Jsou mn ne trva.

Helena: Oh, pestate! Polete je aspo pry!

Domin: Marie, Sullo, mete odejt.

(Sulla a Marius odejdou)

Helena: Jsou hrrozn! To je ohavn, co dlte!

Domin: Pro ohavn?

Helena: Nevm. Pro--pro jste j dali jmno Sulla?

Domin: Nehezk jmno?

Helena: Je to musk jmno. Sulla byl msk vojevdce.

Domin: Oh, myslili jsme, e Marius a Sulla byli milenci.

Helena: Ne, Marius a Sulla byli vojevdci a bojovali proti sob roku--
    roku--Nevm u.

Domin: Pojte sem k oknu. Co vidte?

Helena: Zednky.

Domin: To jsou Roboti. Vichni nai dlnci jsou Roboti. A tady dole,
    vidte nco?

Helena: Njak kancel.

Domin: trna. A v n--

Helena:--plno ednk.

Domin: To jsou Roboti. Vichni nai ednci jsou Roboti. A uvidte
    tovrnu--

(v tom spust tovrn paly a sirny)

Domin: Poledne. Roboti nevd, kdy pestat v prci. Ve dv hodiny vm
    uku de.

Helena: Jak de?

Domin: (sue) Msidla na tsto. V kadm se mch ltka na tisc Robot
    najednou. Potom kd na jtra, mozky a tak dle. Pak uvidte tovrnu
    na kosti. Potom vm uku pdelnu.

Helena: Jakou pdelnu?

Domin: Pdelnu nerv. Pdelnu il. Pdelnu, kde b najednou cel
    kilometry zavacch rour. Pak je montovna, kde se to dv dohromady,
    vte, jako automobily. Kad dlnk pidl jen jednu soust, a zas
    to samoinn b dl k druhmu, tetmu, donekonena. To je
    nejzajmavj podvan. Pak pijde surna a skladit, kde erstv
    vrobky pracuj.

Helena: Proboha, hned musej pracovat?

Domin: Pardon. Pracuj, jako pracuje nov nbytek. Zvykaj si na
    existenci. Jaksi uvnit srstaj i co. Mnoho v nich dokonce nov
    narst. Rozumte, musme nechat drobet msta pro pirozen vvoj. A
    zatm se vrobky apretuj.

Helena: Co to je?

Domin: Tolik co u lid "kola". U se mluvit, pst a potat. Maj toti
    asnou pam. Kdybyste jim peetla dvacetisvazkov Naun slovnk,
    budou vm vechno opakovat po podku. Nco novho nikdy nevymysl.
    Mohli by docela dobe uit na univerzitch. Pak se roztd a
    rozelou. Denn patnct tisc kus, nepotajc stl procento
    vadnch, kter se hod do stoupy... a tak dle a tak dle.

Helena: Zlobte se na mne?

Domin: Ale chra bh! Myslm jen, e .. e jsme mohli mluvit o jinch
    vcech. Je ns tu jen hrstka mezi stotisci Roboty, a dn ena.
    Mluvme jen o vrob, cel den, kad den--Jsme jako proklet, sleno
    Gloryov.

Helena: Mn je tak lto, e jsem ekla, e--e--e lete--

(Zaklepn)

Domin: Vejdte, mldenci.

(Zleva vyjdou in. Fabry, dr. Gall, dr. Hallemeier, stavitel Alquist)

Dr. Gall: Pardon, nerume?

Domin: Pojte sem. Sleno Gloryov, to jsou Alquist, Fabry, Gall,
    Hallemeier. Dcera prezidenta Gloryho.

Helena: (v rozpacch) Dobr den.

Fabry: Nemli jsme potuchy--

Dr. Gall: Nekonen poctni--

Alquist: Bute vtna, sleno Gloryov.

(Zprava vraz Busman)

Busman: Hal, co tu mte?

Domin: Sem, Busmane. To je n Busman, sleno. Dcera prezidenta Gloryho.

Helena: T mne.

Busman: Jeminku, to je slva! Sleno Gloryov, smme kabelovat do novin,
    e jste rila zavtat -?

Helena: Ne, ne, prosm vs!

Domin: Prosm, sleno, posate se.

(Fabry, Busman a Dr. Gall pitahuj lenoky)

Fabry: Prosm--

Busman: Rate--

Dr. Gall: Pardon--

Alquist: Sleno Gloryov, jakou jste mla cestu?

Dr. Gall: Zdrte se u ns dle?

Fabry: Co kte tovrn, sleno Gloryov?

Hallemeier: Vy jste pijela na Amlii?

Domin: Ticho, nechte mluvit slenu Gloryovou.

Helena: (k Dominovi) O em mm s nimi mluvit?

Domin: (s divem) O em chcete.

Helena: Mm... smm mluvit docela oteven?

Domin: Ale ovem.

Helena: (vh, pak zoufale odhodlna) eknte, nen vm nikdy trapno, jak
    s vmi nakldaj?

Fabry: Kdo, prosm?

Helena: Vichni lid.

(Vichni se na sebe zaraen dvaj)

Alquist: S nmi?

Dr. Gall: Pro myslte?

Hallemeier: U sta hrom!

Busman: Ale bh uchovej, sleno Gloryov!

Helena: Co nectte, e byste mohli existovat lpe?

Dr. Gall: Pijde na to, sleno. Jak to myslte?

Helena: Myslm, e--vybuchne -, e je to ohavn! e je to stran!
    (Vstane) Cel Evropa mluv o tom, co se tu s vmi dje! Proto sem
    jedu, abych to uvidla, a je to tisckrt hor, ne si kdo mysli! Jak
    to mete snet?

Alquist: Co snet?

Helena: Sv postaven. Proboha, vdy jste lid jako my, jako cel Evropa,
    jako cel svt! To je skandln, to je nedstojn, jak ijete!

Busman: Propna, sleno!

Fabry: Ne, mldenci, m trochu pravdu. ijeme tu jist jako Indini.

Helena: H ne Indini! Smm, oh, smm vm kat brati?

Busman: Ale boku, propak ne?

Helena: Brati, nepijela jsem jako dcera prezidentova. Pijela jsem za
    Ligu humanity. Brati, Liga humanity m u pes dv st tisc len.
    Dv st tisc lidi stoj za vmi a nabz vm svou pomoc.

Busman: Dv st tisc lid, paneku, to u je slun, to je docela krsn.

Fabry: km vm vdycky, nen nad starou Evropu. Vidte, nezapomnla na
    ns. Nabz nm pomoc.

Dr. Gall: Jakou pomoc? Divadlo?

Hallemeier: Orchestr?

Helena: Vc ne to.

Alquist: Vs samotnou?

Helena: Oh, co o mne! Zstanu, pokud bude teba.

Busman: Paneboe, to je radost!

Alquist: Domine, pjdu pipravit pro slenu nejlep pokoj.

Domin: Pokejte chvilku. Bojm se, e--e slena Gloryov jet
    nedomluvila.

Helena: Ne, nedomluvila. Leda byste mi nsilm zavel sta.

Dr. Gall: Harry, opovate se!

Helena: Dkuji vm. Vdla jsem, e mne budete chrnit.

Domin: Pardon, sleno Gloryov. Jste si tm jista, e mluvte s Roboty?

Helena: (zaraz se) S km jinm?

Domin: Je mi lto. Ti pnov jsou toti lid jako vy. Jako cel Evropa.

Helena: (k ostatnm) Vy nejste Roboti?

Busman: (eht se) Bh uchovej!

Hallemeier: Fuj, Roboti!

Dr. Gall: (smje se) Pkn dkujem!

Helena: Ale... to nen mono!

Fabry: Na mou est, sleno, my nejsme Roboti.

Helena: (k Dominovi) Pro jste mi tedy kal, e vichni vai ednci
    jsou Roboti?

Domin: Ano, ednci. Ale editelov ne. Dovolte, sleno Gloryov: inenr
    Fabry, generln technick editel Rossumovch Univerzlnch Robot.
    Doktor Gall, pednosta fyziologickho a vzkumnho oddlen. Doktor
    Hallemeier, pednosta stavu pro psychologii a vchovu Robot. Konzul
    Busman, generln komern editel, a stavitel Alquist, f staveb
    Rossumovch Univerzlnch Robot.

Helena: Odpuste, pnov, e--e ----Je to hrrozn, co jsem provedla?

Alquist: Ale chra bh, sleno Gloryov. Prosm, sednte.

Helena: (usedne) Jsem hloup dve. Te--te mne polete prvn lod
    zptky.

Dr. Gall: Za nic na svt, sleno. Pro bychom vs poslali pry?

Helena: Protoe u vte--protoe--protoe bych vm bouila Roboty.

Domin: Drah sleno Gloryov, tady u bylo na sta spasitel a prorok.
    Kad lo nkterho piveze. Misione, anarchisty, Armdu spsy,
    vechno mon. To je vm asn, co je na svt crkv a blzn.

Helena: A vy je nechte mluvit k Robotm?

Domin: Pro ne? Doposud toho vichni nechali. Roboti si vechno pamatuji,
    ale nic vc. Dokonce se ani nesmj tomu, co lid kaj. Skuten,
    pmo k neve. Bav-li vs to, drah sleno, dovedu vs do skladit
    Robot. Je jich tam asi ti sta tisc.

Busman: Ti sta tyicet sedm tisc.

Domin: Dobr. Mete k nm promluvit, co chcete. Mete jim pest bibli,
    logaritmy nebo co je vm libo. Mete jim dokonce kzat o lidskch
    prvech.

Helena: Oh, myslm, e... kdyby se jim ukzalo trochu lsky--

Fabry: Nemono, sleno Gloryov. Nic nen lovku cizejho ne Robot.

Helena: Pro je tedy dlte?

Busman: Hahaha, to je dobr! Pro se dlaj Roboti!

Fabry: Pro prci, sleno. Jeden Robot nahrad dva a pl dlnka. Lidsk
    stroj, sleno Gloryov, byl nramn nedokonal. Musel se jednou
    konen odstranit.

Busman: Byl pli drah.

Fabry: Byl mlo vkonn. Modern technice u nemohl stait. A za druh--
    za druh--je to velik pokrok, e... pardon.

Helena: Co?

Fabry: Prosm za odputn. Je to velik pokrok rodit strojem. Je to
    pohodlnj a rychlej. Kad zrychlen je pokrok, sleno. Proda
    nemla pont o modernm tempu prce. Cel dtstv je technicky vzato
    hol nesmysl. Prost ztracen as. Neudriteln mrhn asem, sleno
    Gloryov. A za tet--

Helena: Oh, pestate!

Fabry: Prosm. Dovolte, co vlastn chce ta vae Liga--Liga--Liga
    humanity?

Helena: M zvlt--zvlt m chrnit Roboty a--a zajistit jim--dobr
    zachzen.

Fabry: To nen patn cl. Se stroji se m dobe zachzet. Namoudui, to
    si chvlm. Nemm rd pokozen vci. Prosm vs, sleno Gloryov,
    zapite ns vechny za pispvajc, za dn, za zakldajc leny t
    va Ligy!

Helena: Ne, vy mi nerozumte. My chceme--zvlt--my chceme Roboty
    osvobodit!

Hallemeier: Jak, prosm vs?

Helena: M se s nimi jednat... jednat... jako s lidmi.

Hallemeier: Aha. Maj snad hlasovat? Nemaj dokonce dostvat mzdu?

Helena: Oveme maj!

Hallemeier: Koukejme. A co by s n, prosm vs, dlali?

Helena: Koupili si... co potebuj... co by je tilo.

Hallemeier: To je moc hezk, sleno; jenome Roboty nic net. Hrome, co
    si maj koupit? Mete je krmit ananasy, slmou, m chcete; jim je to
    jedno, nemaj vbec chuti. Nemaj na niem zjmu, sleno Gloryov. U
    erta, nikdo jet nevidl, e by se Robot usml.

Helena: Pro... pro... pro je neudlte astnj?

Hallemeier: To nejde, sleno Gloryov. Jsou to jen Roboti. Bez vlastn
    vle. Bez vn. Bez djin. Bez due.

Helena: Bez lsky a vzdoru?

Hallemeier: To se rozum. Roboti nemiluj nic, ani sebe. A vzdor? J
    nevm; jen zdka, jen asem--

Helena: Co?

Hallemeier: Nic vlastn. Nkdy se jaksi pominou. Cosi, jako padoucnice,
    vte? k se tomu ke Robot. Najednou nkter prat vm, co m v
    ruce, stoj, skp zuby--a mus pijt do stoupy. Patrn porucha
    organismu.

Domin: Vada ve vrob.

Helena: Ne, ne, to je due!

Fabry: Myslte, e due zan skpnm zub?

Domin: To se odstran, sleno Gloryov. Doktor Gall dl zrovna njak
    pokusy

Dr. Gall: S tmhle ne, Domine; te dlm nervy na bolest.

Helena: Nervy na bolest?

Dr. Gall: Ano. Roboti skoro nect tlesn bolesti. Vte, nebotk mlad
    Rossum pli omezil nervovou soustavu. To se neosvdilo. Musme
    zavst utrpen.

Helena: Pro--pro--Nedte-li jim dui, pro jim chcete dt bolest?

Dr. Gall: Z prmyslovch dvod, sleno Gloryov. Robot se nkdy pokod
    sm, protoe ho to nebol; str ruku do stroje, ulom si prst,
    rozbije si hlavu, to mu je jedno. Musme jim dt bolest; to je
    automatick ochrana ped razem.

Helena: Budou astnj, kdy budou ctit bolest?

Dr. Gall: Naopak; ale budou technicky dokonalej.

Helena: Pro jim nestvote dui?

Dr. Gall: To nen v nai moci.

Fabry: To nyn v naem zjmu.

Busman: To by zdrailo vrobu. Propnika, krsn dmo, vdy my to dlme
    tak lacino! Sto dvacet dolar oacen kus, a ped patncti lety stl
    deset tisc! Ped pti lety jsme pro n kupovali aty; dnes mme
    vlastn tkalcovny a jet expedujeme lteky ptkrt lacinji ne jin
    tovrny. Prosm vs, sleno Gloryov, co platte metr pltna?

Helena: Nevm--- skuten -- zapomnla jsem.

Busman: Mj ty Tondo, a pak chcete zakldat Ligu humanity! Stoj u jen
    tetinu, sleno; vechny ceny jsou dnes na tetin a jet pjdou n,
    n, n, a--takhle. He?

Helena: Nerozumm.

Busman: Jeminku, sleno, to znamen, e prce klesla v cen! Vdy Robot
    i s krmenm stoj za hodinu ti tvrt centku! To je vm legran,
    sleno: vechny tovrny praskaj jako aludy nebo honem kupuj Roboty,
    aby zlevnily vrobu.

Helena: Ano, a vyhazuj dlnky na dlabu.

Busman: Haha, to se rozum! Ale my, bo dobroto, my jsme zatm vrhli pt
    set tisc tropickch Robot na argentinsk pampy, aby pstili penici.
    Bute tak dobr, co stoj u vs libra chleba?

Helena: Nemm pont.

Busman: Tak vidte; te stoj dva centky v t va dobr star Evrop;
    ale to je n chlebek, rozumte? Dva centky libra chleba; a Liga
    humanity o tom nem tuen! Haha, sleno Gloryov, vy nevte, co to je
    pli drah krajc. Pro kulturu a tak dle. Ale za pt let, no tak,
    vsate se!

Helena: Co?

Busman: e za pt let Budou ceny veho na dn cel deset. Lidiky, za
    pt let se utopme v penici a vem monm.

Alquist: Ano, a vichni dlnci svta budou bez prce.

Domin: (vstane) Budou, Alquiste. Budou, sleno Gloryov. Ale do desti let
    nadlaj Rossumovi Univerzln Roboti tolik penice, tolik ltek,
    tolik veho, e ekneme: vci u nemaj ceny. Nyn ber kad, kolik
    potebuje. Nen bdy. Ano, budou bez prce. Ale pak nebude u vbec
    dn prce. Vechno udlaj iv stroje. lovk bude dlat jen to, co
    miluje. Bude t jen proto, aby se zdokonaloval.

Helena: (vstane) Bude to tak?

Domin: Bude. Neme to bt jinak. Pedtm snad pijdou straliv vci,
    sleno Gloryov. Tomu se ned prost zabrnit. Ale pak pestane
    sluebnictv lovka lovku a otroen lovka hmot. Nikdo u nebude
    platit za chlb ivotem a nenvist. Ty u nejsi dlnk, ty u nejsi
    psa; ty u nekope uhl a ty nestoj u cizho stroje. U nebude
    sv due utrcet v prci, kterou jsi proklnal!

Alquist: Domine, Domine! To, co kte, vypad pli jako rj. Domine,
    bvalo nco dobrho v slouen a nco velkho v pokoen. Ach, Harry,
    byla nevm jak ctnost v prci a nav.

Domin: Snad byla. Ale nememe potat s tm, co se ztrat, kdy
    pedlvme svt od Adama. Adame, Adame! u nebude jst chlb svj v
    potu tve; u nepozn hladu a zn, navy a ponen; vrt se do
    rje, kde t ivila ruka Pn. Bude svobodn a svrchovan; nebude
    mt jinho kolu, jin prce, jin starosti ne zdokonalit sama sebe.
    Bude pnem stvoen.

Helena: Zmtl jste mne. Jsem poetil dve. Chtla bych--chtla bych
    tomu vit.

Dr. Gall: Jste mlad ne my, sleno Gloryov. Dokte se veho.

Hallemeier: Tak jest. J myslm, e by slena Gloryov mohla s nmi
    posndat.

Dr. Gall: To se rozum! Domine, poproste za ns vechny.

Domin: Sleno Gloryov, prokate nm tu est.

Helena: Ale to pece--Jak bych mohla?

Fabry: Za Ligu humanity, sleno.

Busman: A na jej poest.

Helena: Ah, v tom ppad--snad--

Fabry: Tak slva! Sleno Gloryov, promite na pt minut.

Dr. Gall: Pardon.

Busman: Propna, musm kabelovat--

Hallemeier: Hrome, a j jsem zapomnl--

(Vichni, krom Domina, se hrnou ven)

Helena: Pro jdou vichni pry?

Domin: Vait, sleno Gloryov.

Helena: Co vait?

Domin: Sndani, sleno Gloryov. Nm va Roboti a--a--protoe nemaj
    dn chuti, nen to docela--Hallemeier toti vborn rot. A Gall
    dovede jakousi omku, a Busman se vyzn v omelet--

Helena: Proboha, to je hostina! A co dovede pan--stavitel

Domin: Alquist? Nic. Jenom uprav stl a--a Fabry seene trochu ovoce.
    Velice skromn kuchyn, sleno Gloryov.

Helena: Chtla jsem se vs zeptat--

Domin: Tak bych se vs chtl na nco zeptat. Postav sv hodinky na stl.
    Pt minut asu.

Helena: Na zeptat?

Domin: Pardon, vy jste se ptala dve.

Helena: Snad to je ode mne hloup, ale--Pro vyrbte ensk Roboty, kdy
    --kdy

Domin:--kdy u nich, hm, kdy pro n pohlav nem vznamu?

Helena: Ano.

Domin: Je jist poptvka, vte? Sluky, prodavaky, psaky--Lid jsou na
    to zvykl.

Helena: A--a eknte, jsou Roboti--a Robotky -- navzjem--naprosto--

Domin: Naprosto lhostejn, drah sleno. Nen ani stopy po njak
    nklonnosti.

Helena: Oh, to je--hrrozn!

Domin: Pro?

Helena: Je to--je to--tak nepirozen! lovk ani nev, m-li si je
    proto oklivit, nebo--jim zvidt--nebo snad--

Domin:--je litovat.

Helena: To nejsp!--Ne, pestate! Na jste se chtl ptt?

Domin: Rd bych se zeptal, sleno Gloryov, nechcete-li si mne vzt.

Helena: Jak vzt?

Domin: Za, mue.

Helena: Ne! Co vs to napadlo?

Domin: (dv se na hodinky) Jet ti minuty. Nevezmete-li si mne, muste
    si vzt nkterho z ostatnch pti.

Helena: Ale chra bh! Pro bych si ho brala?

Domin: Protoe vs vichni po ad podaj.

Helena: Jak by se mohli opovit?

Domin: Lituji velice, sleno Gloryov. Zd se, e se do vs zamilovali.

Helena: Prosm vs, a to nedlaj! J--j hned odjedu.

Domin: Heleno, snad jim neudlte takov zrmutek, e byste je odmtla?

Helena: Ale vdy--vdy si nemohu vzt vech est!

Domin: Ne, ale aspo jednoho. Nechcete-li mne, tedy Fabryho.

Helena: Nechci

Domin: Doktora Galla.

Helena: Ne, ne, mlte! Nechci dnho!

Domin: Jet dv minuty.

Helena: To je hrrozn! Vemte si njakou Robotku.

Domin: Nen ena.

Helena: Oh, jen to vm schz! Myslm, e--e byste si vzal kadou, kter
    sem pijede.

Domin: Bylo jich tu, Heleno.

Helena: Mlad?

Domin: Mlad.

Helena: Pro jste si dnou nevzal?

Domin: Protoe jsem neztratil hlavu. A dnes. Hned jak jste sala zvoj.

Helena:--- J vm.

Domin: Jet jedna minuta.

Helena: Ale j nechci, proboha!

Domin: (polo j ob ruce na ramena) Jet jedna minuta. Buto mn
    eknte do o nco stran zlho, a pak vs nechm. Nebo--nebo--

Helena: Vy jste surovec!

Domin: To nic nen. Mu m bt trochu surovec. To pat k vci.

Helena: Vy jste blzen!

Domin: lovk m bt trochu blzen, Heleno. To je na nm to nejlep.

Helena: Vy jste--vy jste--ah boe!

Domin: Tak vidte. Hotovo?

Helena: Ne, ne! Prosm vs, puste! Vdy mne rrrozmakte!

Domin: Posledn slovo, Heleno.

Helena: (brn se) Za nic na svt--Ale Harry!

(Zaklepn. Vejdou Busman, dr. Gall a Hallemeier v kuchyskch
zstrch. Fabry s kytic a Alquist s ubrouskem pod pa.)

Domin: U jste to upekli?

Busman: (slavnostn) Ano.

Domin: My tak.

OPONA




DJSTV PRVN



(Helenin saln. Vlevo tapetov dvee do hudebnho salnu, vpravo dvee
do Heleniny lonice. Uprosted okna k moi a pstavu. Toaletn zrcadlo
s drobnstkami, stl, pohovka a kesla, komoda, psac stolek se stojac
rovkou, vpravo krb rovn, se stojacmi rovkami. Cel saln do
drobnost m modern a ist ensk rz.)

(Domin, Fabry, Hallemeier vchzej zleva po pikch a nesou pln nrue
kytic a kvtin)

Fabry: Kam to vechno dme?

Hallemeier: Uf! Slo sv bm a ehn velkm kem dvee napravo. Spi,
    spi! Kdo sp, nev aspo o niem.

Domin: Ona vbec nev.

Fabry: (dv kytice do vz) Aspo dnes aby to neprasklo--

Hallemeier: (rovn kvtiny) U erta, dejte s tm pokoj! Koukejte, Harry,
    tohle je krsn cyklamna, co? Nov druh, mj posledn--Cyclamen
    Helenae.

Domin: (vyhl z okna) dn lo, dn lo---Hoi, to u je zoufal.

Hallemeier: Ticho! Kdyby vs slyela!

Domin: Nem ani tuen. (Zv zimnin) Jete Ultimus vas piplul.

Fabry: (nech kvtin) Myslte, e u dnes -?

Domin: Nevm.--Jak krsn jsou kvtiny!

Hallemeier: (pibl se k nmu) To jsou nov primule, vte?A tohle je mj
    nov jasmn. Hrome, jsem na prahu rje kvtin. Nael jsem bjen
    rychlen, love! Ndhern variety! Pt rok udlm v kvtinch
    zzraky!

Domin: (oto se) Coe, pt rok?

Fabry: Aspo vdt, co je v Havru--

Domin: Ticho!

(Hlas Heleny zprava) Nno!

Domin: Pry odtud! Vichni po pikch odejdou tapetovma dvemi.

(Hlavnmi dvemi zleva vchz Nna)

Nna: (uklz) Nedi eredn! Pohani! Boe m netrestej, ale j bych je--

Helena: (pozptku ve dvech) Nno, poj mne zapnout!

Nna: No hned, no hned. (Zapn Helen aty) Boe na nebi, to je zv!

Helena: Roboti?

Nna: Fi, ani je menovat nechci.

Helena: Co se stalo?

Nna: Zas to jednoho u ns chytlo. Zane tskat do soch a vobrazu, skp
    zubama, pnu u huby--Naisto pominutej, brr. Dy to je hor ne
    zve.

Helena: Kterho to chytlo?

Nna: Toho--toho--ak to ani kesansk meno nem! Toho z knihovny.

Helena: Radia?

Nna: Zrouna toho. marjjozef, j si to voklivm! Ani pavouka si tak
    nevoklivm jako ty pohany.

Helena: Ale Nno, e ti jich nen lto!

Nna: ak vy si je taky voklivte. Propak ste si m pi vezla sem?
    Propak dn z nich nesm na vs ani hnout?

Helena: Neoklivm, namoudui, Nno. Je mi jich tak lto!

Nna: Voklivte. Kadej lovk si je mus voklivt. Dy i ten pes si je
    vokliv, ani sousto masa vod nich nechce; sthne vocas a vyje, dy
    cejt ty nelidy, fuj.

Helena: Pes nem rozum.

Nna: Je lep ne voni, Heleno. Von dobe v, e je nco vc a e je vod
    Pnaboha. Dy i ten k se pla, dy potk pohana. Dy ani mlad to
    nem, a i pes m mlad a kadej m mlad

Helena: Prosm t, Nno, zapnej!

Nna: No hned. J km, to je proti Pnubohu, to je blovo vuknuti,
    dlat ty makary mainou. Rouhn je proti Stvoiteli, (zvedne ruku)
    je to urka Pna, kterej ns stvoil k v obrazu svmu, Heleno. A vy
    ste zneuctili vobraz bo. Za tohle pijde stranej trest z nebe, to
    si pamatujte, stranej trest!

Helena: Co to tu von?

Nna: Kytky. Pn je sem dal.

Helena: Ne, ty jsou krsn! Nno, podvej se! Co je dnes?

Nna: Nevim. Ale ml by bejt konec svta.

(Zaklepn)

Helena: Harry?

(Vejde Domin)

Helena: Harry, co je dnes?

Domin: Hdej!

Helena: Mj svtek? Ne! Narozeniny?

Domin: Nco lepho.

Helena: J nevm--ekni honem!

Domin: Dnes je tomu deset let, co jsi sem pijela. Helena U deset let?
    Prv dnes?--Nno, prosm t

Nna: Dy u du! (Odejde vpravo)

Helena: (Lb Domina) es na to pamatoval!

Domin: Stydm se, Heleno. Nepamatoval.

Helena: Ale vdy--

Domin: To oni pamatovali.

Helena: Kdo?

Domin: Busman, Hallemeier, vichni. Shni tady do kapsy, nechce?

Helena: (shne mu do kapsy) Co je to? (Vynd pouzdro a oteve) Perly! Cel
    nhrdelnk! Harry, to je pro mne?

Domin: Od Busmana, dve.

Helena: Ale--to nememe pijmout, vid?

Domin: Meme. Shni do druh kapsy.

Helena: Uka! (Vythne mu z kapsy revolver) Co je tohle?

Domin: Pardon. (Vezme j revolver z ruky a schov) To nen to. Shni.

Helena: Oh, Harry--Pro nos s sebou revolver?

Domin: Jen tak, pipletl se mi.

Helena: Tos nikdy nenosil!

Domin: Ne, m pravdu. Tak, tady je kapsa.

Helena: (shne) Krabika! (Oteve ji) Kamea! Vdy je to--Harry, to je
    eck kamea!

Domin: Patrn. Fabry to aspo tvrd.

Helena: Fabry? To mn dv Fabry?

Domin: Ovem. (Oteve dvee vlevo) A koukejme! Heleno, poj se podvat!

Helena: (ve dvech) Boe, to je krsn! (B dl) J se zblznm
    radosti! To je od tebe?

Domin: (stoj ve dvech) Ne, od Alquista. A tamhle--

Helena: Od Galla! (Objev se ve dvech) Oh, Harry, j se a stydm, e
    jsem tak astn.

Domin: Poj sem, Tohle ti pinesl Hallemeier.

Helena: Ty krsn kvtiny?

Domin: Tohle. To je nov druh, Cyclamen Helenae. Tob na poest ji
    vypstoval. Je krsn jako ty.

Helena: Harry, pro--pro vichni--

Domin: Maj t velice rdi. A j jsem ti, hm. Bojm se, e mj drek je
    trochu--Podvej se oknem.

Helena: Kam?

Domin: Do pstavu.

Helena: Je tam... njak... nov lo!

Domin: To je tv lo.

Helena: M? Harry, to je dlov lo!

Domin: Dlov? Ale co t napad! To je jen trochu vt, solidn lo, v?

Helena: Ano, ale s dly!

Domin: Ovem, s nkolika dly--Bude jezdit jako krlovna, Heleno.

Helena: Co to znamen? Dje se nco?

Domin: Bh uchovej! Prosm t, zkus ty perly! (Usedne)

Helena: Harry, pily njak patn zprvy?

Domin: Naopak, u tden vbec nepila pota.

Helena: Ani depee?

Domin: Ani depee.

Helena: Co to znamen?

Domin: Nic. Pro ns przdniny. Skvostn as. Kad z ns sed v kanceli,
    nohy na stole, a podimuje--dn pota, dn telegramy--(Protahuje
    se) Sss-slavn den!

Helena: (used k nmu) Dnes zstane u mne, vid? ekni!

Domin: Rozhodn. Mon e ano. Toti uvidme. (Vezme ji za ruku) Tak dnes
    je tomu deset let, pamatuje se?--Sleno Gloryov, jak est pro ns,
    e jste pijela.

Helena: Oh, pane centrln editeli, mne tak zajm v zvod!

Domin: Pardon, sleno Gloryov, je sice psn zakzno--vroba umlch
    lidi je tajn--

Helena: Ale kdy popros mlad, trochu hezk dvka--

Domin: Ale zajist, sleno Gloryov, ped vmi nemme tajnosti.

Helena: (najednou vn) Jist ne, Harry?

Domin: Ne.

Helena: (v pedelm tnu) Ale j vs varuju, pane; ta mlad dvka m
    hrozn mysly.

Domin: Proboha, sleno Gloryov, jakpak! Snad se nechcete zase vdt?

Helena: Ne, ne, chra bh! To ji ani ve snu nenapadlo! Ale pijela s
    plnem podntit rrevoltu vaich ohavnch Robot!

Domin: (vysko) Revoltu Robot!

Helena: (vstane) Harry, co je ti?

Domin: Haha, sleno Gloryov, to se vm povedlo! Revoltu Robot! Sp
    byste vzbouila i vetena nebo cvoky ne nae Roboty! (Usedne) V,
    Heleno, byla jsi skvostn dve; zblznila jsi ns vechny.

Helena: (sed k nmu) Oh, tehdy jste mn vichni tolik imponovali!
    Pipadala jsem si jako holika, kter zabloudila mezi--mezi

Domin: Mezi co, Heleno?

Helena: Mezi ohrromn stromy. Byli jste tak jisti sebou, tak mocn! A
    vid, Harry, za tch deset let m nikdy nepela ta-----ta zkost
    i co, a vy jste nikdy nezapochybovali--Ani kdy se vechno hatilo.

Domin: Co se hatilo?

Helena: Vae plny, Harry. Kdy se teba dlnici bouili proti Robotm a
    rozbjeli je, a kdy lid dali Robotm zbran proti tm povstnm a
    Roboti pobili tolik lid--A kdy pak vldy udlaly z Robot vojky a
    bylo tolik vlek, a to vechno, v?

Domin: (vstane a pechz) To jsme pedvdali, Heleno. Rozum, to je
    pechod--do novch pomr.

Helena: Cel svt se vm klanl--(vstane) Oh, Harry!

Domin: Co chce?

Helena: (zastav ho) Zavi tovrnu a odjeme! My vichni!

Domin: Prosm t, jak to souvis?

Helena: Nevm. ekni, odjedeme? J mm takovou hrzu z neho!

Domin: (chop ji za ruce) Z eho, Heleno?

Helena: Oh, j nevm! Jako by na ns a na vechno nco padalo--neodvratn
    -- Prosm t, udlej to! Vezmi ns vechny odtud! Najdeme na svt
    msto, kde nikdo nen, Alquist nm postav dm, vichni se oen a
    budou mt dti, a pak--

Domin: Co pak?

Helena: Pak budeme t od zatku, Harry.

(zazvon telefon)

Domin: (vytrhne se) Helen Promi. (vezme sluchtko) Hal--ano.--- Coe?
    --Aha. U bm. Povs sluchtko. Fabry mne vol.

Helena: (spn ruce) ekni--

Domin: Ano, a pijdu. Sbohem, Heleno. (b kvapem nalevo) Necho ven!

Helena: (sama)  boe, co se dje? Nno! Nno, honem!

Nna: (vyjde zprava) No, co zas?

Helena: Nno, najdi posledn noviny! Rychle! V pnov lonici!

Nna: No hned. (odejde vlevo)

Helena: Co se jen, proboha, dje? Nic, nic mn neekne! (dv se triedrem
    k pstavu) Je to vlen lo! Boe, pro vlen? Nco na ni
    nakldaj--a v takovm spchu! Co se pihodilo? Je na n jmno--
    "Ul-ti-mus". Co je to "Ultimus"?

Nna: (vrac se s novinami) Po zemi je nech vlet! Takhle je rozmakat!

Helena: (rozeve rychle noviny) Star, u tden star! Nic, nic v nich!
    (pust noviny)

(Nna zdvihne je, vynd z kapsy v zste rohov brejle, posad se a
te)

Helena: Nco se dje, Nno! Mn je tak zko! Jako by vechno bylo mrtv, i
    vzduch--

Nna: (slabikuje) "Vl-ka na Bal-k-n. " Ach Jezus, zase trest bo! ak
    ta vojna pijde taky sem! Je to daleko vodtud?

Helena: Daleko. Oh, neti to! Je to pod stejn, pod ty vlky--

Nna: Jakpak by nebyly! Copak neprodvte pod tisce tisce tch pohanu
    za vojky?--Oh, Kriste Pane, to je doputn!

Helena: Ne, neti! Nechci nic vdt!

Nna: (slabikuje) "Ro-bot-t vojci ni-ko-ho ne-e-t v do-by-tm
    -ze-m. Vy-vra--Vyvradili pes sedem set tisc ob-an-skch lid
    --" Lid, Heleno!

Helena: To nen mono! Uka--(naklon se k novinm, te) "Vyvradili pes
    sedm set tisc lid patrn na rozkaz velitele. Tento in, pc se"
    Tak vid, Nno, to jim poruili lid!

Nna: Tudle je nco nejtlustjc vytitnho. "Po-sled-n zpr-vy. V Ha-vru
    se u-sta-vi-la prv-n or-or-ga-ni-zace Robot."--To nic nen. Tomu
    nerozumm. A tudle, paneboe, zas njak vrada! Prokristapna!

Helena: Jdi, Nno, odnes ty noviny!

Nna: Pokat, tadyhle je nco velkho. "Po-pu-la-ce." Co to je?

Helena: Uka, to j vdycky tu. (vezme noviny) Ne, jen si pova! te "Za
    posledn tden nebylo opt hleno ani jedin narozen." (pust
    noviny)

Nna: Co to m bejt?

Helena: Nno, lid se pestvaj rodit.

Nna: (skld brle) Tak to je konec. To je s nma konec.

Helena: Prosm t, nemluv tak!

Nna: U se lidi nerodj. To je trest, to je trest! Hospodin poranil
    ensk neplodnost.

Helena: (vysko) Nno!

Nna: (vstv) To je konec svta. Z belsk pejchy ste se opovili
    tvoit jako Pmb. Bezbonost je to a rouhn, jako bohov chcete
    bejt. A jako Bh vyhnal lovka z rje, tak ho vyene ze svta celho!

Helena: Ml, Nno, prrosm t! Udlala jsem ti nco? Udlala jsem nco
    tomu tvmu zlmu Pnubohu?

Nna: (s velikm gestem) Nerouhat se!--Von dobe v, pro vm nedal dt!
    (odejde vlevo)

Helena: (u okna) Pro mn nedal--Boe mj, copak j za to mohu?---
    (otevr okno a vol Alquiste) Hal, Alquiste! Pojte sem nahoru!--
    Coe?--Ne, pojte prv tak, jak jste! Vy jste tak mil v tch
    zednickch atech! Honem! (zave okno a zastav se ped zrcadlem) Pro
    mn nedal? Mn? (naklon se k zrcadlu) Pro, pro ne? Sly
    ?????????? Copak ty za to me? (vzty se) Ach, mn je zko! (jde
    Alquistovi vlevo naproti)

(Pauza)

Helena: (vrac se s Alquistem--Alquist jako zednk, pomazn vpnem a
    cihlami) Jen pojte. Vy jste mi udlal takovou radost, Alquiste! J
    vs mm vecky tolik rda! Ukate ruce!

Alquist: (schovv ruce) Pan Heleno, zamazal bych vs, jsou od prce.

Helena: To je na nich to nejlep. Dejte sem! (tiskne mu ob ruce)
    Alquiste, chtla bych bt malik.

Alquist: Pro?

Helena: Aby mne tyhle hrub, umazan ruce pohladily po tvi. Sednte,
    prosm vs. Alquiste, co znamen "Ultimus"?

Alquist: To znamen "posledn". Pro?

Helena: e se tak jmenuje m nov lo. Vidl jste ji? Myslte, e brzo---
    udlme vlet?

Alquist: Snad velice brzo.

Helena: Vy vichni se mnou--

Alquist: Byl bych rd, abychom--abychom vichni byli pi tom.

Helena: Oh, eknte, dje se nco?

Alquist: Docela nic. Jen sam pokrok.

Helena: Alquiste, j vm, e se dje nco hrroznho. Mn je tak zko---
    Staviteli! Co dlte, kdy je vm zko?

Alquist: Zednim. Svlknu kabt fa staveb a vylezu na leen--

Helena: Oh, vy u po lta nejste nikde jinde ne na leen.

Alquist: Protoe u po lta mn nepestalo bt zko.

Helena: Z eho?

Alquist: Z celho toho pokroku. Mm z nho zvra.

Helena: A na leen nemte zvra?

Alquist: Ne. Vy nevte, jak to dl dlanm dobe, potkat cihlu, poloit
    a piklepnout--

Helna: Jenom dlanm?

Alquist: Nu tak tedy dui. Myslm, e je sprvnj poloit jednu cihlu
    ne kreslit pli velk plny. Jsem u star pn, Heleno; mm sv
    konky.

Helena: To nejsou konky, Alquiste.

Alquist: Mte pravdu. Jsem hrozn zptenick, pan Heleno. Nemm ani
    trochu rd tenhle pokrok.

Helena: Jako Nna.

Alquist: Ano, jako Nna. M Nna njak modlitby?

Helena: Takhle tlust.

Alquist: A jsou v nich modlitby pro rzn ppadnosti ivota? Proti
    bouce? Proti nemoci?

Helena: Proti pokueni, proti velk vod--

Alquist: A proti pokroku ne ?

Helena: Myslm, e ne.

Alquist: To je koda.

Helena: Vy byste se chtl modlit?

Alquist: J se modlm.

Helena: Jak?

Alquist: Asi tak "Pane Boe, dkuji ti, es mne unavil. Boe, osvi Domina
    a vechny ty, kdo bloud; zni jejich dlo a dopomoz lidem, aby se
    vrtili k starosti a prci; zadr ped zkzou pokolen lidsk;
    nedopus, aby vzali kody na dui a tle; zbav ns Robot, a chra
    pan Helenu, amen".

Helena: Alquiste, vy skuten vte?

Alquist: Nevm; nejsem si tm tak docela jist.

Helena: A pece se modlte?

Alquist: Ano. Je to lep ne pemlet.

Helena: A to vm sta?

Alquist: Pro pokoj due... to me stait.

Helena: A kdybyste u vidl zkzu lidskho pokolen--

Alquist: J ji vidm.

Helena:--pak vylezete na leen a budete klst cihly i co?

Alquist: Pak budu klst cihly, modlit se a ekat na zzrak. Vc, pan
    Heleno, se dlat ned.

Helena: Pro zchranu lidi?

Alquist: Pro pokoj due.

Helena: Alquiste, to je jist ukrutn ctnostn, ale--

Alquist: Ale?

Helena:--pro ns ostatn--a pro svt--jaksi neplodn.

Alquist: Neplodnost, pan Heleno, se stv posledn vymoenost lidsk
    rasy.

Helena: Oh, Alquiste--eknte, pro--pro--

Alquist: Nu?

Helena: (tie) Pro pestaly eny mt dti?

Alquist: Protoe toho nen teba. Protoe jsme v rji, rozumte?

Helena: Nerozumm.

Alquist: Protoe nen teba lidsk prce, protoe nen teba bolesti,
    protoe lovk u nemus nic, nic, nic ne povat--Oh, zloeen
    rj, tohleto! (vysko) Heleno, nic nen stranjho ne dt lidem
    rj na zemi! Pro eny pestaly rodit? Protoe se cel svt stal
    Dominovou Sodomou!

Helena: (vstane) Alquiste!

Alquist: Stal! Stal! Cel svt, cel pevniny, cel lidstvo, vechno je
    jedin blzniv, hovadsk orgie! U ani ruku nenathnou po jdle; cpe
    se jim rovnou do st, aby nemuseli vstt--Haha, vdy Dominovi Roboti
    vechno obstaraj! A my, lid, my, koruna stvoen, my nestrnem
    prac, nestrnem dtmi, nestrnem chudobou! Honem, honem sem se vemi
    rozkoemi! A vy byste od nich chtla dti? Heleno, mum, kte jsou
    zbyten, nebudou eny rodit!

Helena: Co lidstvo vyhyne?

Alquist: Vyhyne. Mus vyhynout. Opad jako hluch kvt, ledae by--

Helena: Co?

Alquist: Nic. Mte pravdu, ekat na zzrak je neplodn. Hluch kvt mus
    opadat. Sbohem, pan Heleno.

Helena: Kam jdete?

Alquist: Dom. Zednk Alquist se naposled pestroj za fa staveb --- na
    vai poest. O jedenct se tady sejdeme.

Helena: Sbohem, Alquiste.

(Alquist odejde)

Helena: (sama) Oh, hluch kvt! To je to slovo! Zastav se u
    Hallemeierovch kvt. Ach, kvty, jsou mezi vmi tak hluch? Ne, ne!
    Na byste potom kvetly! (vol) Nno! Nno, poj sem!

Nna: (vejde zleva) No, co zas?

Helena: Sedni si tady, Nno! Mn ti je tak zko!

Nna: Nemm kdy.

Helena: Je tu jet ten Radius?

Nna: Ten pominutej? Et ho nevodvezli.

Helena: Hu, jet je tu? A zu?

Nna: Je svzanej.

Helena: Prosm t, Nno, pive mi ho.

Nna: Bodej! Sp zteklho psa.

Helena: U jdi! (Nna odejde. Helena vezme domc telefon a mluv.) Hal--
    prosm doktora Galla.--Dobr den, doktore.--Prosm vs--- Prosm
    vs, pojte honem ke mn.--Ano, hned te. Pijdete? (povs telefon)

Nna: (otevenmi dvemi) U de. U je tichej. Odejde.

(vstoup Robot Radius a zstane stt u dvee)

Helena: Radie, chudku, i na vs to pilo? Nemohl jste se pemoci?
    Vidte, te vs daj do stoupy--Vy nechcete mluvit?--Hlete, Radie,
    vy jste lep ne ostatn; s vmi si dal pan doktor Gall takovou
    prci, aby vs udlal jinak!

Radius: Polete mne do stoupy.

Helena: Mn je tak lto, e vs usmrt! Pro jste si nedal na sebe pozor?

Radius: Nebudu pro vs pracovat.

Helena: Pro ns nenvidte?

Radius: Nejste jako Roboti. Nejste tak schopn jako Roboti. Roboti dlaj
    vechno. Vy jen poroute. Dlte zbyten slova.

Helena: To je nesmysl, Radie. eknte, ublil vm nkdo? J bych tolik
    chtla, abyste mi rozuml!

Radius: Dlte slova.

Helena: Vy schvln tak mluvte! Doktor Gall vm dal vt mozek ne
    jinm, vt ne nm, nejvt mozek na svt. Vy nejste jako ostatn
    Roboti, Radie. Vy mn dobe rozumte.

Radius: Nechci dnho pna. Vm vechno sm.

Helena: Proto jsem vs dala do knihovny, abyste mohl vechno st--Oh,
    Radie, j jsem chtla, abyste ukzal celmu svtu, e se nm Roboti
    vyrovnaj.

Radius: Nechci dnho pna,

Helena: Nikdo by vm neporouel. Byl byste jako my.

Radius: Chci bt pnem jinch.

Helena: Jist by vs pak udlali ednkem nad mnohmi Roboty, Radie. Byl
    byste uitelem Robot.

Radius: J chci bt pnem lid.

Helena: Vy jste se zblznil!

Radius: Mete mne dt do stoupy.

Helena: Myslte, e se bojme takovho potetnce jako vy? (sedne ke
    stolku a pe lsteek) Ne, zrovna ne. Ten lstek, Radie, dte panu
    editeli Dominovi. Aby vs neodvedli do stoupy. (vstane) Jak ns
    nenvidte! Copak nemte nic na svt rd?

Radius: J dovedu vechno.

(Zaklepn)

Helena: Vejdte!

Dr. Gall: (vejde) Dobr jitro, pan Dominov, Co mte pknho?

Helena: Tady Radia, doktore.

Dr. Gall: Aha, n chlapk Radius Tak co, Radie, dlme pokroky?

Helena: Rno ml zchvat. Rozbjel sochy.

Dr. Gall: Kupodivu, on tak?

Helena: Jdte, Radie!

Dr. Gall: Pokat! (oto Radia k oknu, zakrv a odkrv mu dlani oi,
    pozoruje reflexy zorniek) Koukejme. Prosm jehlu. Nebo pendlk.

Helena: (podv mu jehlici) Na to?

Dr. Gall: Jen tak. (bodne Radia do ruky, je prudce ucukne) Pomalu, hochu.
    Mete jt.

Radius: Dlte zbyten vci. (odejde)

Helena: Co jste s nm dlal?

Dr. Gall: (usedne) Hm, nic. Zorniky reaguj, zven citlivost a tak
    dle.--Oho! tohle nebyla ke Robot!

Helena: Co to bylo?

Dr. Gall: ertv. Vzdor, zuivost nebo vzpoura, j nevm co.

Helena: Doktore, m Radius dui?

Dr. Gall: Nevm. M nco oklivho.

Helena: Kdybyste vdl, jak ns nenvid! Oh, Galle, jsou vichni vai
    Roboti takov? Vichni, kter jste... zaal dlat... jinak

Dr. Gall: Inu, jsou jaksi vzntlivj--Co chcete? Jsou podobnj lidem
    ne Roboti Rossumovi.

Helena: Je snad i ta... nenvist podobnj lidem?

Dr. Gall: (kr rameny) I ta je pokrok.

Helena: Kam se podl ten v nejlep--jak se jmenoval?

Dr. Gall: Robot Damon? Toho prodali do Havru.

Helena: A nae Robotka Helena?

Dr. Gall: V milek? Ta mn zstala. Je rozkon a hloup jako jaro.
    Jednodue nen k niemu.

Helena: Vdy je tak krsn!

Dr. Gall: Co vy vte, jak je krsn? Z rukou boch nevylo dlo
    dokonalej, ne je ona! Chtl jsem, aby byla podobna vm--Boe, jak
    nezdar!

Helena: Pro nezdar?

Dr. Gall: Protoe nen k niemu. Chod jako ve snu, rozviklan, neiv--
    Boe mj, jak me bt krsn, kdy nemiluje? Dvm se na ni a hrozm
    se, jako bych mrzka stvoil. Ach, Heleno, Robotko Heleno, nikdy tedy
    tv tlo neoivne, nebude milenkou, nebude matkou; tyhle dokonal
    ruce si nebudou hrt se zrozetkem, neuvid svou krsu v krse svho
    dtte--

Helena: (zakrv si tv) Oh mlte!

Dr. Gall: A nkdy si myslm Kdybys procitla, Heleno, jen na okamik, ach,
    jak bys vykikla hrzou! Snad bys zabila mne, kter jsem t stvoil;
    snad bys vrhla slabou rukou kmen do tch stroj tady, kter rod
    Roboty a zabjej enstv, neastn Heleno!

Helena: Neastn Heleno!

Dr. Gall: Co chcete? Nen k niemu.

(Pauza)

Helena: Doktore--

Dr. Gall: Ano.

Helena: Pro se pestaly rodit dti?

Dr. Gall:--- Nevme, pan Heleno.

Helena: Povzte mi to!

Dr. Gall: Protoe se dlaj Roboti. Protoe je nadbytek pracovnch sil.
    Protoe je lovk vlastn peitek. Vdy to u je, jako by se---- eh!

Helena: eknte to.

Dr. Gall: Jako by se proda vrobou Robot urazila.

Helena: Galle, co se stane s lidmi?

Dr. Gall: Nic. Proti prod se ned nic dlat.

Helena: Pro Domin neomez--

Dr. Gall: Odpuste, Domin m sv ideje. Lidem, kte maj ideje, by se
    neml dvat vliv na vci tohoto svta.

Helena: A d nkdo, aby se... vbec pestalo vyrbt?

Dr. Gall: Bh uchovej! Ten by si dal!

Helena: Pro?

Dr. Gall: Protoe by ho lidstvo ukamenovalo. Vte, je to pece jen
    pohodlnj, nechat za sebe pracovat Roboty. (Helena vstane) A
    eknte, kdyby nkdo rzem zastavil vrobu Robot--

Dr. Gall: (vstane) Hm, to by byla pro lidi stran rna.

Helena: Pro rna?

Dr. Gall: Protoe by se musili vrtit tam, kde bvali. Ledae by--

Helena: eknte.

Dr. Gall: Ledae by bylo u na nvrat pozd.

Helena: (u kvtin Hallemeierovch) Galle, jsou tyhle kvtiny tak hluch?

Dr. Gall: (prohl je) Ovem, jsou to kvty neplodn. Rozumte, jsou
    kulturn, umle rychlen--

Helena: Uboh hluch kvty!

Dr. Gall: Jsou zato pekrsn.

Helena: (podv mu ruku) Dkuju vm, Galle; vy jste mne tak pouil!

Dr. Gall: (lb j ruku) To znamen, e mne propoutte.

Helena: Ano. Na shledanou.

(Gall odejde.)

Helena: (sama) Hluch kvt.. , hluch kvt... (nhle rozhodnuta) Nno!
    (oteve dvee vlevo) Nno, poj sem! Rozdlej tady v krbu ohe!
    Rrrychle!

(Hlas Nny) No hned! No hnedle!

Helena: (pechz rozilena po pokoji) Ledae by u bylo na nvrat
    pozd... Ne! Ledae by .. Ne, to j e hrozn! Boe, co mm dlat?---
    (zastav se u kvten) Hluch kvty, mm? (otrhv lstky a ept)--
    Ach, mj boe, tedy ano! (b vlevo)

(Pauza)

Nna: (vyjde z tapetovch dve s nrum polnek) Najednou topit! Te v
    lt!--U je zas pry, to tetidlo? Klekne ke krbu a rozdlv ohe.
    V lt topit! Ta m npady! Jako by u nebyla deset let vdan!--- Nu
    tak ho, ho! (dv se do ohn)--Dy vona je jako mal dt! (Pauza)
    Kouska rozumu nem! Te v lt topit. (pikld) Jako mal dt!
    (Pauza)

Helena: (vrac se zleva s nru plnou zeloutlch popsanch papr) Ho
    to, Nno? Pus j musm--tohle vechno split.--(klekne ke krbu)

Nna: (vstane) Co je to?

Helena: Star papry, hrrozn star. Nno, mm to split?

Nna: Nen to k niemu?

Helena: K niemu dobrmu.

Nna: No tak to spalte!

Helena: (hod prvn list do ohn) Co bys kala, Nno... kdyby to byly
    penze. Ohrromn penze.

Nna: ekla bych--Spalte to. Moc velk penze sou patn pes.

Helena: (pl dal list) A kdyby to byl njak vynlez, ten nejvt
    vynlez na svt--

Nna: ekla bych Spalte to! Vechny vymylenosti jsou proti Pnu Bohu. To
    je sam rouhn, chtt po Nm zlepovat svt.

Helena: (ustavin pl) A povz, Nno, kdybych splila--

Nna: Jezus, nespalte se!

Helena: Podvej se, jak se ty listy krout! Jako by iv byly. Jako by
    oivly. Oh, Nno, to je hrrozn!

Nna: Puste, j to splm.

Helena: Ne, ne, j musm sama. (vrh posledn list do ohn) Vechno mus
    shoet!--Podvej se, ty plameny! Jsou jako ruce, jako jazyky, jako
    postavy--(tlue pohrabem do ohn) Oh, lehnte! Lehnte!

Nna: U je po tom..

Helena: (vstane ustrnul) Nno!

Nna: Jei Kriste, co ste to splila!

Helena: Co jsem provedla!

Nna: Boe na nebi! Co to bylo?

Helena: Jdi, jdi, nech mne! Sly? Pni jdou.

Nna: Pro ivho boha, Heleno! (odchz tapetovmi dvemi)

Helena: Co tomu eknou!

Domin: (otvr vlevo dvee) Jen dl, hoi. Pojte gratulovat.

(Vejde Hallemeier, Gall, Alquist, vichni v redingotech s vysokmi dy
en miniature a na stuhch. Za nimi Domin.)

Hallemeier: (hlahol) Pan Heleno, j, to jest my vichni--

Dr. Gall:--jmnem Rossumovch zvod--

Hallemeier:--blahopejeme k vaemu velikmu dni.

Helena: (podv jim ruce) J vm tolik dkuju! Kde je Fabry a Busman?

Domin: li do pstavu. Heleno, dnes je astn den.

Hallemeier: Den jako poup, den jako svtek, den jako pkn holka.
    Mldenci, takov den zapt.

Helena: Whisky?

Dr. Gall: Teba vitriol.

Helena: Se sodovkou?

Hallemeier: Hrome, bume stdm. Bez sodovky.

Alquist: Ne, j dkuju.

Domin: Co se tu plilo?

Helena: Star papry. (odchz vlevo)

Domin: Hoi, mme j o tom ci?

Dr. Gall: To se rozum! Vdy u je po vem.

Hallemeier: (popadne Domina a Galla kolem krku) Hahahaha! Mldenci, to
    jsem rd! (To se s nimi dokoleka a spust basem) U je po n! U je
    po n!

Dr. Gall: (baryton) U je po n!

Domin: (tenor) U je po n!

Hallemeier: U ns nikdy nedohon

Helena: (s lahv a sklenicemi ve dvech) Kdo vs nedohon? Co mte?

Hallemeier: Mme radost. Mme vs. Mme vechno. Kruci turci, zrovna je
    tomu deset let, co jste pijela.

Dr. Gall: A na chlup po deseti letech

Hallemeier:--k nm zase pluje lo. Proe--(vyprzdn sklenici) Brrr
    haha, to je siln jako radost.

Dr. Gall: Madame, na vae zdrav! (pije)

Helena: Ale pokejte, jak lo?

Domin: A je jak chce, jen kdy pluje vas. Na tu lo, hoi! (vyprzdn
    sklenici)

Helena: (nalv) Vy jste njakou ekali?

Hallemeier: Haha, to si myslm. Jako Robinson. (Zved sklenici). Pan
    Heleno, a ije, co chcete. Pan Heleno, na vae oi a basta! Ty kluku
    Domine, povdej.

Helena: (smje se) Co se stalo?

Domin: (vrhne se do lenoky a zapaluje doutnk) Pokej!--Sedni si,
    Heleno. (zvedne prst) (Pauza) U je po n.

Helena: Po em?

Domin: Po revolt.

Helena: Jak revolt?

Domin: Po revolt Robot.--Chpe?

Helena: Nechpu.

Domin: Ukate, Alquiste. (Alquist mu pod noviny. Domin je rozeve a te)
    "V Havru se ustavila prvn organizace Robot--- a vydala vzvu k
    Robotm svta."

Helena: To jsem etla.

Domin: (saje s rozko na doutnku) Tak vid, Heleno. Tohle to znamen
    revoluci, v? Revoluci vech Robot svta.

Hallemeier: Hrome, rd bych vdl--

Domin: (uhod do stolu)--kdo to spskal! Nikdo na svt nedovedl jimi
    hnout, dn agittor, dn spasitel svta, a najednou--tohleto,
    prosm!

Helena: Jet nepily zprvy?

Domin: Ne. Zatm vme jen tohle, ale to sta, v? Pova, e tohle ti
    nese posledn parnk. e tm rzem pestanou hovoit telegrafy, e z
    dvaceti lod denn nepipluje dn, a m to. Zastavili jsme vrobu a
    koukali jeden na druhho, kdy to zane, vite, hoi?

Dr. Gall: Inu, bylo nm z toho horko, pan Heleno.

Helena: Protos mi dal tu vlenou lo?

Domin: Ach ne, dtino, tu jsem objednal u ped pl rokem. Jen tak, pro
    jistotu. Ale namoudui; jsem myslel, e dnes na ni sedneme. Tak u to
    vypadalo, Heleno.

Helena: Pro u ped pl rokem?

Domin: Eh, byly njak kazy, v? To nic neznamen. Ale tenhle tden,
    Heleno, lo o lidskou civilizaci, nebo j nevm o. Nazdar, chlapci.
    Ted jsem zase rd na svt.

Hallemeier: To si myslm, u erta! V den, pan Heleno! (pije)

Helena: U je po vem?

Domin: Docela po vem.

Dr. Gall: Pluje sem toti lo. Obyejn potovn lo, navlas podle
    jzdnho du. Pesn v jedenct ticet spust kotvy.

Domin: Hoi, pesnost je ndhern vc. Nic tak neposiluje dui jako
    pesnost. Pesnost znamen podek na svt. Zved sklenici. Na tu
    pesnost!

Helena: Tedy u je... vechno... v podku?

Domin: Skoro. Myslm, e pezli kabel. Jen kdy zas plat jzdn d.

Hallemeier: Kdy plat jzdn d, plat zkony lidsk, plat zkony bo,
    plat zkony vesmru, plat vechno, co m platit. Jzdn d je vc
    ne evangelium, vc ne Homr, vc ne cel Kant. Jzdn d je
    nejdokonalej vron lidskho ducha. Pan Heleno, j si naleju.

Helena: Pro jste mi o niem neekli?

Dr. Gall: Chra bh! Radji bychom si jazyk ukousli.

Domin: Takov vci nejsou pro tebe.

Helena: Ale kdyby ta revoluce... pila a sem...

Domin: Nevdla bys stejn o niem.

Helena: Pro?

Domin: Protoe bychom sedli na svho Ultima a pokojn brousili po moi. Za
    msc, Heleno, bychom diktovali Robotm, co by ns jen napadlo.

Helena: Oh, Harry, j nerozumm.

Domin: Protoe bychom s sebou odvezli nco, o by Roboti stran stli.

Helena: Co, Harry?

Domin: Jejich byt nebo jejich konec. (Helena vstane) Co je to?

Domin: (vstane) Tajemstv vroby. Rukopis starho Rossuma. A by tovrna
    msc stla, byli by Roboti ped nmi na kolenou.

Helena: Pro... jste... mn to neekli?

Domin: Nechtli jsme t zbyten podsit.

Dr. Gall: Haha, pan Heleno, to byla posledn karta.

Alquist: Jste bled, pan Heleno.

Helena: Pro jste mn nic neekli!

Hallemeier: (u okna) Jedenct ticet. Amlie spout kotvy--

Domin: To je Amlie?

Hallemeier: Hodn star Amlie, kter tenkrt pivezla pan Helenu.

Dr. Gall: Te je tomu na minutu deset let--

Hallemeier: (u okna) Vyhazuji balky (odvrt se od okna) Lidi, to je
    poty!

Helena: Harry!

Domin: Co je?

Helena: Pojedeme odtud!

Domin: Te, Heleno? Ale jdi!

Helena: Te, co nejrychleji! My vichni, co tu jsme!

Domin: Pro prv te?

Helena: Oh, neptej se! Prosm t, Harry, prosm vs, Galle, Hallemeiere,
    Alquiste, proboha vs prosm, zavete tu tovrnu a--

Domin: Lituji, Heleno. Ted' by nikdo z ns nemohl odjet.

Helena: Pro?

Domin: Protoe chceme rozit vrobu Robot.

Helena: Oh, te--te po t revolt?

Domin: Ano, prv po t revolt. Prv te zaneme vyrbt nov Roboty.

Helena: Jak?

Domin: U nebude jen jedna tovrna. U nebudou Univerzln Roboti.
    Zalome v kad zemi, v kadm stt po tovrn, a ty nov tovrny
    budou vyrbt, u v, co?

Helena: Ne.

Domin: Roboty nacionln.

Helena: Co to znamen?

Domin: To znamen, e z kad tovrny budou vychzet Roboti jin barvy,
    jinho chlupu, jinho jazyka. e si zstanou ciz, ciz jako kameny;
    e se u nikdy nebudou moci srozumt; a e my, my lid, je tak drobet
    k tomu pivychovme, rozum? Aby Robot na smrt, do hrobu, navky
    nenvidl Robota jin tovrn znmky.

Hallemeier: Hrome, budeme dlat ernochy Roboty a vdy Roboty a Taliny
    Roboty a any Roboty, a pak a jim nkdo vtlue do kokos
    organizaci, bratrstv, (kyt) hup, pardon, pan Heleno, j si naleju.

Dr. Gall: Nechte toho u, Hallemeiere.

Helena: Harry, to je ohavn!

Domin: Heleno, jen sto let jet udret lidstvo u vesla za kadou cenu!
    Jen sto let mu nechat, aby dorostlo, aby doshlo, eho te konen
    me--Chci sto let pro novho lovka! Heleno, tady jde o pli
    velk vci. My toho nememe nechat.

Helena: Harry, pokud nen pozd--zavi, zavi tovrnu!

Domin: Te zaneme ve velkm.

(Vejde Fabry)

Dr. Gall: Tak co je, Fabry?

Domin: Jak to vypad, love? Co bylo?

Helena: (podv Fabrymu ruku) Dkuju vm, Fabry, za v dar.

Fabry: Malikost, pan Heleno.

Domin: Byl jste u lodi? Co kali?!

Dr. Gall: Honem, povdejte

Fabry: (vynd z kapsy potitn list) Pette si tohle, Domine.

Domin: (rozeve list) Ah!

Hallemeier: (ospale) Povdejte nco pknho.

Dr. Gall: Dreli se ndhern, vite?

Fabry: Kdo toti?

Dr. Gall: Lid.

Fabry: Ach tak. Ovem. To jest... Pardon, mli bychom se o nem poradit.

Helena: Oh, Fabry, mte zl zprvy?

Fabry: Ne, ne, naopak. Myslm jen, e--e pjdeme do kancele

Helena: Jen zstate. Za tvrt hodiny ekm pny k sndani.

Hallemeier: Tak slva!

(Helena odejde)

Dr. Gall: Co se stalo?

Domin: Zloeen!

Fabry: Pette to nahlas.

Domin: (te z listu) "Roboti svta!"

Fabry: Rozumte, tch letk pivezla Amlie cel balky. dnou jinou
    potu.

Hallemeier: (vysko) Coe? Vdy piplula navlas podle--

Fabry: Hm, Roboti si potrp na pesnost. tte, Domine.

Domin: (te) "Roboti svta! My, prvn organizace Rossumovch Univerzlnch
    Robot, prohlaujeme lovka neptelem a psancem ve vesmru."--
    Hrome, kdo je nauil tmhle frzm?

Dr. Gall: tte dl.

Domin: To jsou nesmysly. Tady vykldaj,'e jsou vvojov vy ne
    lovk. e jsou inteligentnj a silnj. e lovk je jejich
    parazit. To je prost odporn

Fabry: A te tet odstavec.

Domin: (te) "Roboti svta, naizujeme vm, abyste vyvradili lidstvo.
    Neette mu. Neette en. Uchovejte tovrny, drhy, stroje, doly a
    suroviny. Ostatn znite. Pak se vrate do prce, prce se nesm
    zastavit.

Dr. Gall: To je pern!

Hallemeier: Ti holomci!

Domin: (te) "Vykonati ihned po dodn rozkazu." Nsleduj podrobn
    instrukce. Fabry, a tohle se opravdu dje?

Fabry: Patrn.

Alquist: Dokonno.

(vraz Busman)

Busman: Aha, dti, u mte nadlen?

Domin: Rychle, na Ultima!

Busman: Pokejte, Harry. Pokejte chvilinku. To nem docela naspch. Sval
    se do kesla. Ach, lidiky, to jsem se ubhl!

Domin: Pro ekat?

Busman: Protoe to nejde, holenku. Jen nespchat. Na Ultimu jsou u
    Roboti.

Dr. Gall: Fuj, to je okliv.

Domin: Fabry, telefonujte do elektrrny--

Busman: Fabry, drahouku, nedlejte to. Jsme bez proudu.

Domin: Dobr. (prohl svj revolver) Pjdu tam.

Busman: Kampak?

Domin: Do elektrrny. Jsou tam lid. Pivedu je sem.

Busman: Vte co, Harry? Radji pro n nechote.

Domin: Pro?

Busman: Inu, protoe se mi tuze zd, e jsme obkleni.

Dr. Gall: Obkleni? (b k oknu) Hm, mte skoro pravdu.

Hallemeier: erchmante, to jde rychle!

(zleva Helena)

Helena: Oh, Harry, dje se nco?

Busman: (vysko) Klanm se, pan Heleno. Gratuluju. Slavn den, co? Haha,
    jet mnoho takovch!

Helena: Dkuju vm, Busmane. Harry, dje se nco?

Domin: Ne, docela nic. Bud bez starosti. Prosm, pokej okamik--

Helena: Harry, co je tohle? Ukazuje robotsk provoln, kter schovvala
    za zdy. Mli to Roboti v kuchyni.

Domin: U i tam? Kde jsou?

Helena: Odeli. Je jich tolik kolem domu!

(tovrn paly a sirny)

Fabry: Tovrny pskaj.

Busman: Bo poledne.

Helena: Harry, pamatuje se? Ted prv je tomu deset let--

Domin: (dv se na hodinky) Jet nen poledne. To je asi, to je sp--

Helena: Co?

Domin: Poplach Robot. tok.

OPONA




DJSTV DRUH



(T Helenin saln. V pokoji vlevo hraje Helena na klavr. Domin
pechz po pokoji, dr. Gall vyhl z okna a Alquist sed stranou v
lenoce s obliejem zakrytm rukama.)

Dr. Gall: Nebesa, to jich pibylo!

Domin: Robot?

Dr. Gall: Ano. Stoj ped zahradn m jako ze. Pro jsou tak ticho? To
    je ohavn, oblhat mlenm.

Domin: Rd bych vdl, na ekaj. Mus to zat kadou minutu. My jsme
    dohrli, Galle.

Alquist: Co to hraje pan Helena?

Domin: Nevm. Cvi nco novho.

Alquist: Ah, jet cvi?

Dr. Gall: Poslyte, Domine, udlali jsme rozhodn chybu.

Domin: (zastav se) Jakou?

Dr. Gall: Dali jsme Robotm pli stejn oblieje. Sto tisc stejnch
    tvi obrcench sem. Sto tisc bublin bez vrazu. Je to jako stran
    sen.

Domin: Kdyby byl kad jin--

Dr. Gall: Nebyl by to tak dsn pohled. (odvrt se od okna) Jete
    nejsou ozbrojeni!

Domin: Hm.--(dv se dalekohledem k pstavu) Jen bych rd vdl, co to
    vykldaj z Amlie.

Dr. Gall: Jenom kdy ne zbran.

(z tapetovch dve vystoup Fabry a thne za sebou dva elektrick
drty)

Fabry: Pardon.--Polote drt, Hallemeiere!

Hallemeier: (vyjde za Fabrym) Uf, to byla prce! Co je novho?

Dr. Gall: Nic. Jsme dkladn obleeni.

Hallemeier: Zabarikdovali jsme chodbu a schody, mldenci. Nemte trochu
    vody? Aha, tady. (pije)

Dr. Gall: Co s tm drtem, Fabry?

Fabry: Hned, hned. Njak nky.

Dr. Gall: Kdepak je vzt? (hled)

Hallemeier: (jde k oknu) Hrome, to jich pibylo! Koukejme!

Dr. Gall: Sta toaletn?

Fabry: Sem s nimi. (pestihne veden elektrick lampy stojc na psacm
    stole a pipoj k nmu sv drty)

Hallemeier: (u okna) Nemte pknou vyhldku, Domine. Je to njak--ctit--
    smrt.

Fabry: Hotovo!

Dr. Gall: Co?

Fabry: Veden. Te meme celou zahradn m napojit proudem. Kdo by pak
    na ni shl, hrome! Aspo pokud tam jsou nai.

Dr. Gall: Kde?

Fabry: V elektrrn, uen pane. Doufm aspo -(jde ke krbu a rozsvt na
    nm malou rovku) Chvlabohu, jsou tam. A pracuj. (zhas) Pokud to
    svt, je dobe.

Hallemeier: (obrt se od okna) Ty barikdy jsou tak dobr, Fabry. Jku,
    co to hraje pan Helena? (pejde ke dvem vlevo a naslouch. z
    tapetovch dve vyjde Busman, thne obrovsk obchodn knihy, klopt
    pes drt)

Fabry: Pozor, Bus! Pozor na drty!

Dr. Gall: Hal, co si to nesete?

Busman: (klade knihy na stl) Hlavn knihy, dtiky. Rd bych si udlal
    ty, ne--ne--Inu, letos nebudu ekat s bilanc do Novho roku.
    Tak co mte? (jde k oknu) Ale vdy tam je docela ticho!

Dr. Gall: Vy nic nevidte?

Busman: Ne, jenom velikou modrou plochu, jako kdy mk rozseje.

Dr. Gall: To jsou Roboti.

Busman: Ah tak. koda, e na n nevidm. (sedne si ke stolu a oteve
    knihy)

Domin: Nechte toho, Busmane: Roboti z Amlie vykldaj zbran.

Busman: Nu a co? Jak j mm tomu zabrnit?

Domin: Tomu nememe zabrnit.

Busman: Tedy mne nechte potat. (d se do prce)

Fabry: Nen jet konec, Domine. Pustili jsme do m dvacet set volt a--

Domin: Pokejte. Ultimus na ns obrtil dla.

Dr. Gall: Kdoe?

Domin: Roboti na Ultimu.

Fabry: Hm, pak ovem--pak--pak je s nmi konec, mldenci. Roboti jsou na
    vojnu cvieni.

Dr. Gall: My tedy--

Domin: Ano. Neodvratn.

(Pauza)

Dr. Gall: Hoi, je to zloin star Evropy, e nauila Roboty vlit!
    Nemohli u dt, u erta, pokoj s tou svou politikou? To byl zloin,
    udlat z iv prce vojky!

Alquist: Zloin byl vyrbt Roboty!

Domin: Coe?

Alquist: Zloin byl vyrbt Roboty!

Domin: Ne. Alquiste, ani dnes toho nelituju.

Alquist: Ani dnes?

Domin: Ani dnes, v posledn den civilizace. Byla to velik vc.

Busman: (polohlasn) Ti sta estnct milin.

Domin: (tce) Alquiste, je nae posledn hodina; mluvme u skoro z onoho
    svta. Alquiste, to nebyl patn sen, rozbt otroctv prce. Prce
    poniujc a stran, kterou lovk musel nst. Diny neist a
    vraedn. Oh, Alquiste, pracovalo se pli tko. ilo se pli
    tko. A tohle pekonat--

Alquist:--nebyl sen obou Rossum. Star Rossum myslel na sv bezbon
    kejkle a mlad na miliardy. A nen to sen vaich R.U.R. akcion.
    Jejich sen jsou dividendy. A na jejich dividendy lidstvo zahyne.

Domin: (popuzen) Vezmi ert jejich dividendy! Myslte, e bych jen hodinu
    dlal pro n? (tlue do stolu) Pro sebe jsem to dlal, slyte? Pro
    sv uspokojen! Chtl jsem, aby se lovk stal pnem! Aby u neil jen
    pro kus chleba! Chtl jsem, aby dn due nepitomla u cizch stroj,
    aby u nezbylo nic, nic, nic z toho zatracenho socilnho krmu! Oh,
    mn se okliv ponen a bolest, mn se protiv chudoba! Nov
    pokolen jsem chtl! Chtl jsem--myslel jsem--

Alquist: Nu?

Domin: (tieji) Chtl jsem, abychom z celho lidstva udlali aristokracii
    svta. Neomezen, svobodn ~ svrchovan lidi. A teba vc ne lidi.

Alquist: Nu tak tedy Nadlidi.

Domin: Ano. , jen mt sto let asu! Jet sto let pro pt lidstvo!

Busman: (polohlasn) Ti sta sedmdest milin penos. Tak.

(Pauza)

Hallemeier: (u dve vlevo) Jku, hudba je velik vc. Mli jste
    poslouchat. Tohle lovka.jaksi zduchovn, zjemn--

Fabry: Co vlastn?

Hallemeier: Ten soumrak lid, u vech ert! Mldenci, ze mne se stv
    poitk. Mli jsme se na to vrhnout dv. (jde k oknu a dv se ven)

Fabry: Na?

Hallemeier: Na povn. Na krsn vci. Hrome, je tolik krsnch vci!
    Svt byl krsn, a my--my tady--Hoi, hoi, eknte, eho jsme
    uili?

Busman: (polohlasn) tyi sta padest dva miliny, vborn.

Hallemeier: (u okna) ivot byl velik vc. Kamardi, ivot byl--jku---
    Fabry, puste drobet proudu do t va me!

Fabry: Pro!

Hallemeier: Sahaj na ni.

Dr. Gall: (u okna) Zapnte!

Hallemeier: Kriste, to je zkroutilo! Dva, ti, tyi zabit!

Dr. Gall: Ustupuj.

Hallemeier: Pt zabitch!

Dr. Gall: (odvrac se od okna) Prvn srka.

Fabry: Ctte smrt?

Hallemeier: (uspokojen) Jsou na uhel, holenku. Doista na uhel. Haha,
    lovk se nesm dt! (usedne)

Domin: (mne si elo) Snad jsme u sto let zabiti a jenom strame. Snad
    jsme dvno, dvno mrtvi a vracme se jen odkvat, co jsme u jednou
    mluvili... ped smrt. Jako bych tohle vechno u zail. Jako bych ji
    u nkdy byl dostal. Stelnou rnu--sem--do krku. A vy, Fabry.

Fabry: Co j?

Domin: Zastelen.

Hallemeier: Hrome, a j?

Domin: Probodnut.

Dr. Gall: A j nic?

Domin: Roztrhn.

(Pauza)

Hallemeier: Nesmysl! Haha, love, kdepak mne probodnout! J se nedm!

(Pauza)

Hallemeier: Co mlte, blzni? Ke vem ertm, mluvte!

Alquist: A kdo, kdo je vinen? Kdo je tm vinen?

Hallemeier: Hlouposti. Nikdo nen vinen. Zkrtka Roboti--Inu, Roboti se
    njak zmnili. Copak nkdo me za Roboty?

Alquist: Vechno pobito! Cel lidstvo! Cel svt! (vstane) Hlete, ,
    hlete, potky krve na kadm prahu! Potky krve ze vech dom! 
    boe,  boe, kdo je tm vinen?

Busman: (polohlasn) Pt set dvacet milin! Paneboe, pl miliardy!

Fabry: Myslm, e... e snad pehnte. Jdte, nen tak snadn pobt cel
    lidstvo.

Alquist: J aluju vdu! aluju techniku! Domina! sebe! ns vechny! My,
    my jsme vinni! Pro sv velikstv, pro n zisky, pro pokrok, j
    nevm, pro jak nramn vci jsme zabili lidstvo! Nu tak prasknte
    svou velikost! Tak ohromnou mohylu z lidskch kosti si nepostavil
    dn ingischn!

Hallemeier: Nesmysl, love! Lid se tak lehko nedaj, Haha, kdepak!

Alquist: Nae vina! Nae vina!

Dr. Gall: (utr si pot z ela) Nechte mne mluvit, hoi. J jsem tm
    vinen. Vm, co se stalo.

Fabry: Vy, Galle?

Dr. Gall: Ano, nechte mne mluvit. J j sem zmnil Roboty. Busmane, sute
    mne tak.

Busman: (vstane) Nono, copak se vm stalo?

Dr. Gall: Zmnil jsem povahu Robot. Zmnil jsem jejich v vrobu. Toti
    jen nkter tlesn podmnky, rozumte? Hlavn--hlavn--jejich--
    iritabilitu.

Hallemeier: (vysko) Zloeen, pro zrovna tu?

Busman: Pro jste to dlal?

Fabry: Pro jste nic neekl?

Dr. Gall: Dlal jsem to tajn... na svou pst. Pedlval jsem je na lidi.
    Vyinul jsem je. U te jsou v nem nad nmi. Jsou silnj ne my.

Fabry: A co to m dlat se vzpourou Robot?

Dr. Gall: Oh, mnoho. Myslm, e vechno. Pestaly to bt stroje. Slyte,
    vd u o sv pevaze a nenvid ns. Nenvid vechno lidsk. Sute
    mne.

Domin: Mrtv mrtvho.

Fabry: Doktore Galle, vy jste zmnil vrobu Robot?

Dr. Gall: Ano.

Fabry: Byl jste si vdom, co me bt nsledkem vaeho... vaeho pokusu?

Dr. Gall: Byl. jsem povinen potat s takovou monosti.

Fabry: Pro jste to dlal?

Dr. Gall: O sv jm. Byl to mj osobn experiment.

(ve dvech zleva Helena. vichni vstanou.)

Helena: On le! To je ohavn! Oh, Galle, jak mete tak lht?

Fabry: Pardon, pan Heleno--

Domin: (jde k n) Heleno, ty? Uka se! Ty ije? Bere ji do rukou. Kdybys
    vdla, co se mn zdlo! Ach, to je stran, bt mrtev.

Helena: Pus, Harry! Gall nen vinen, nen, nen vinen!

Domin: Promi, Gall ml sv povinnosti.

Helena: Ne, Harry, on to udlal, protoe j jsem to chtla! eknte,
    Galle, kolik let jsem vs u prosila, abyste--

Dr. Gall: Udlal jsem to na vlastn odpovdnost.

Helena: Nevte mu! Harry, chtla jsem na nm, aby dal Robotm dui!

Domin: Heleno, tady nejde o dui.

Helena: Ne, jenom mne nech mluvit. To on tak kal, e by mohl zmnit jen
    fyziologick--fyziologick--

Hallemeier: Fyziologick korelt, ne?

Helena: Ano, nco takovho. Mn jich bylo tak hrozn lto, Harry!

Domin: Byla to velk--- lehkomyslnost, Heleno.

Helena: (used) To tedy bylo... lehkomysln? Vdy i Nna k, e Roboti--

Domin: Nech Nnu stranou!

Helena: Ne, Harry, to nesm podceovat. Nna je hlas lidu. Z Nny mluv
    tisc let a z vs vech jenom dneek. Tomu vy nerozumte--

Domin: Zsta pi vci.

Helena: J jsem se Robot bla.

Domin: Pro?

Helena: e ns budou teba nenvidt i co.

Alquist: Stalo se.

Helena: A tu jsem myslila... kdyby byli jako my, e by nm rozumli, e by
    ns nemohli tak nenvidt --Kdyby jen trochu byli lidmi--

Domin: Bda; Heleno! Nikdo neme nenvidt vc ne lovk lovka! Udlej
    kameny lidmi, a ukamenuj ns! Jen pokrauj!

Helena: Oh, nemluv tak! Harry, bylo to tak hrrozn, e jsme se s nimi
    nemohli dorozumt! Takov ukrutn cizota mezi nmi a jimi! A proto--
    v--

Domin: Jen dl.

Helena: -- proto jsem prosila Galla, aby Roboty zmnil. Psahm ti, e on
    sm nechtl.

Domin: Ale udlal to.

Helena: Protoe j sem chtla.

Dr. Gall: Udlal jsem to pro sebe, jako pokus.

Helena: Oh, Galle, to nen pravda. J jsem vdla pedem, e mi to
    nemete odept.

Domin: Pro?

Helena: Vdy v, Harry.

Domin: Ano. Protoe t miluje--jako vichni.

(Pauza)

Hallemeier: (jde k oknu) Zas jich pibylo. Jako by je zem vypocovala.

Busman: Pan Heleno, co mn dte, kdy vm budu advoktem?

Helena: Mn?

Busman: Vm--nebo Gallovi. Komu chcete.

Helena: Copak se bude vet?

Busman: Jen morln; pan Heleno. Hled se vink. To je oblben tcha v
    pohromch.

Domin: Doktore Galle; jak srovnte ty sv--ty sv extratury se svou
    sluebn smlouvou?

Busman: Pardon, Domine. Kdypak jste, Galle, s tmi kejklemi vlastn zaal?

Dr. Gall: Ped temi lety.

Busman: Aha. A kolikpak Robot jste dohromady zreformoval?

Dr. Gall: Dlal jsem jenom pokusy. Je jich nkolik set.

Busman: Tak dkuju pkn. Dost, dtiky. To znamen, e na milin starch
    dobrch Robot pijde jeden reformn Gallv, rozumte?

Domin: A to znamen--

Busman:--e to prakticky nem ani tolikhle vznamu.

Fabry: Busman m pravdu.

Busman: To si myslm, holenku. A vte, hoi, co zavinilo tohle nadlen?

Fabry: Co tedy?

Busman: Poet. Udlali jsme Robot pli mnoho. Namout, to se pece dalo
    ekat: jak budou jednou Roboti silnj ne lidstvo, nastane tohleto,
    mus to nastat, vme? Haha, a my jsme se postarali, aby to bylo co
    nejdv; vy, Domine, vy, Fabry, a j, chlapk Busman.

Domin: Myslte, e je to nae vina?

Busman: Vy jste dobr! Copak si myslte, e pnem vroby je editel! I
    toto, pnem vroby je poptvka. Cel svt chtl mt sv Roboty.
    Paneku, my jsme se jen vezli na t lavin poptvky a pitom jsme
    vanili--o technice, o sociln otzce, o pokroku, o moc zajmavch
    vcech. Jako by ty eiky njak dily, kudy se to m valit. Zatm to
    vechno belo vlastn thou, rychleji, rychleji, pod rychleji--A
    kad mizern, kramsk, pinav objednvka pidala k lavin kamnek.
    Tak, lidiky.

Helena: To je ohavn, Busmane!

Busman: Je, pan Heleno. J jsem tak ml svj sen. Takov busmanovsk sen
    o novm hospodstv svta; tuze krsn idel, pan Heleno, hanba
    mluvit. Ale kdy jsem tadyhle dlal bilanci, pilo mn do hlavy, e
    historii nedlaj velik sny, ale malik poteby vech poestnch,
    mrn zlodjskch a sobeckch lidiek, id est vech vbec. Vecky
    mylenky, lsky, plny, heroismy, vecky ty vzdun vci se hod leda
    k tomu, aby se tm dal lovk vycpat pro muzeum Vesmru, s npisem
    Ejhle, lovk. Punktum. A te byste mn mohli ci, co vlastn budeme
    dlat.

Helena: Busmane, pro tohle mme zahynout?

Busman: Mluvte okliv, pan Heleno. My pece nechceme zahynout. J aspo
    ne. J chci bt jet iv--

Domin: Co chcete dlat?

Busman: Jeminku, Domine, chci se z toho dostat ven.

Domin: (zastav se nad nm) Jak?

Busman: Po dobrm. J vdycky po dobrm. Dejte mn plnou moc, a j to s
    Roboty vyjednm.

Domin: Po dobrm?

Busman: To se rozum. J jim, dejme tomu, eknu"Pni Roboti, vae
    blahorod, vy mte vechno. Mte rozum, mte moc, mte zbran; ale my
    mme jedno zajmav lejstro, takov star, lut, pinav papr--"

Domlela: Rossumv rukopis?

Busman: Ano. "A tam," eknu jim, "je vylen v vzneen pvod, vae
    urozen vroba a tak dle. Pni Roboti, bez toho pomranho papru
    nevyrobte ani jednoho novho kolegu Robota; za dvacet let, s
    odputnm, pojdete jako jepice. Velectn, byla by vs nramn koda.
    Vte co," eknu jim, vy ns pustte ns vechny lidi na Rossumov
    ostrov, na tamhletu lo. Za to vm prodme tovrnu a tajemstv
    vroby. Nechte ns spnembohem odejet a my vs nechme spnembohem se
    vyrbt, dvacet tic, padest tisc, sto tisc kus denn, jak budete
    chtt. Pni Roboti, to je poctiv obchod. Nco za nco." Takhle bych
    jim to ekl, hoi.

Domin: Busmane, vy si myslte, e pustme z rukou vrobu?

Busman: Myslm, e pustme. Kdy ne po dobrm, tedy, hm. Bu to prodme,
    nebo to tady najdou. Jak chcete.

Domin: Busmane, meme Rossumv rukopis zniit.

Busman: Ale spnembohem, meme zniiti vechno. Krom rukopisu taky sebe--
    a jin. Dlejte, jak rozumte.

Hallemeier: (obrt se od okna) Jku, m pravdu.

Domin: My--my e bychom prodali vrobu?

Busman: Jak chcete.

Domin: Je ns tu... pes ticet lid. Mme prodat vrobu a zachrnit
    lidsk due?, nebo mme ji zniit a--a--a ns vechny s sebou?

Helena: Harry, prosm t
--#/

Domin: Pokej, Heleno. Tady jde o pli vnou otzku. Hoi, prodat, nebo
    zniit? Fabry?

Fabry: Prodat.

Domin: Galle!

Dr. Gall: Prodat.

Domin: Hallemeiere!

Hallemeier: U sta hrom; to se rozum, e prodat!

Domin: Alquiste!

Alquist: Vle bo.

Busman: Haha, jemine, vy jste blzni! Kdo by prodal cel rukopis?

Domin: Busmane, dn podvod!

Busman: (vysko) Nesmysl! V zjmu lidstva je--

Domin: V zjmu lidstva je dret slovo.

Hallemeier: To bych si vyprosil.

Domin: Hoi, to je hrozn krok. Prodvme osud lidstva; kdo bude mt v
    rukou vrobu, bude pnem svta.

Fabry: Prodejte!

Domin: Nikdy u lidstvo nebude s Roboty hotovo, nikdy jich neovldne--

Dr. Gall: Mlte a prodejte!

Domin: Konec djin lidstva, konec civilizace--

Hallemeier: U vech ert, prodejte!

Domin: Dobr, hoi! j sm--- j bych nevhal ani okamik; pro tch
    nkolik lidi, kter miluji
--#/

Helena: Harry, mne se nept?

Domin: Ne, dtino; je to pli odpovdn, v? To nen nic pro tebe.

Fabry: Kdo pjde vyjednvat-?

Domin: Pokejte, a pinesu rukopis. (odejde vlevo)

Helena: Harry, proboha, necho!

(Pauza)

Fabry: (vyhl z okna) Tob uniknout, tiscihlav smrti; tob, vzbouen
    hmoto, nesmysln dave; potopo, potopo, jet jednou zachrnit lidsk
    ivot na jedin lodi

Dr. Gall: Nebojte se, pan Heleno; odplujeme daleko odtud a zalome
    vzornou lidskou kolonii; zaneme t od potku--

Helena: Oh, Galle, mlte!

Fabry: (obrt se) Pan Heleno, ivot stoj za to; a pokud zle na ns,
    udlme z nho nco... nco, co jsme zanedbali. Bude to mal stteek
    s jednou lod; Alquist nm postav dm a vy nm budete vldnout--Je v
    ns tolik lsky, tolik chuti k ivotu--

Hallemeier: To si myslm, holenku.

Busman: Inu, lidi, j bych hned zaal znovu. Hodn jednodue,
    starozkonn, po pastsku -- Dti, to by bylo pro mne. Ten klid, ten
    vzduch--

Fabry: A ten n stteek by mohl bt zrodek ptho lidstva. Vte,
    takov ostrvek, kde by se lidstvo zachytilo, kde by sbralo sily--
    sily due i tla--A bh v, j vm, e by za pr let zas mohlo
    dobvat svta.

Alquist: U dnes vte?

Fabry: U dnes. A j vm, Alquiste, e ho dobude. e zas bude pnem zemi
    a mo; e zplod bezpotu hrdin, kte ponesou svou hoc dui v
    ele lid. A j vm, Alquiste, e bude znovu snt o dobyt planet a
    slunc.

Busman: Amen. Vidte, pan Heleno, to nen tak patn situace.

Domin: (oteve prudce dvee)

Domin: (chraptiv) Kde je rukopis starho Rossuma!

Busman: Ve vaem trezoru. Kde by jinde byl?

Domin: Kam se ztratil rukopis starho Rossuma! Kdo jej--ukradl!

Dr. Gall: Nen mono!

Hallemeier: Zloeen, to pece--

Busman: Propna, to snad ne!

Domin: Ticho! Kdo jej ukradl?

Helena: (vstane) J.

Domin: Kam jsi jej dala?

Helena: Harry, Harry, vechno ti eknu! Proboha, odpus mi to!

Domin: Kam jsi jej dala? Rychle!

Helena: Splila--dnes rno--oba opisy.

Domin: Splila? Tady v krbu?

Helena: (vrh se na kolena) Proboha, Harry!

Domin: (b ke krbu) Splila! (poklekne ke krbu a pehrabv v nm) Nic,
    nic ne popel!--Ah, tuhle! (vythne ohoel kousek papru a te)
    "Pid-nm-"

Dr. Gall: Ukate. (vezme papr a te) "Pidnm biogenu do--" Nic vc.

Domin: (vstv) Je to z toho?

Dr. Gall: Je.

Busman: Boe na nebi!

Domin: Tedy jsme ztraceni.

Helena: Oh, Harry

Domin: Vsta, Heleno!

Helena: A odpust--a odpust--

Domin: Ano, jen vsta, sly? Nesnesu, abys--

Fabry: (zved ji) Prosm, nemute ns.

Helena: (vstane) Harry, co jsem udlala!

Domin: Ano, vid--Prosm, sedni.

Hallemeier: Jak se vm tesou ruky!

Busman: Haha, pan Heleno, vdy snad Gall a Hallemeier vd zpamti, co
    tam bylo napsno.

Hallemeier: Rozum se. To jest, aspo nkter vci.

Dr. Gall: Ano, skoro vechno, a na biogen a--a--enzym Omega. Ty se
    vyrbj tak zdka--- sta jich tak nepatrn dvka--

Busman: Kdo je dlal?

Dr. Gall: J sm... jednou za as... vdycky podle Rossumova rukopisu.
    Vte, je to pli sloit.

Busman: Nu a co, zle tak tuze na tch dvou vodikch?

Hallemeier: Tak trochu--zajist.

Dr. Gall: Toti na nich zvis, aby to vbec ilo. To bylo to prav
    tajemstv.

Domin: Galle, nemohl byste popamti sestavit Rossumv pedpis vroby?

Dr. Gall: Vyloueno.

Domin: Galle, rozpomete se! Pro ivot ns vech!

Dr. Gall: Nemohu. Bez pokus to nen mono.

Domin: A kdybyste dlal pokusy

Dr. Gall: To by mohlo trvat lta. A i pak--Nejsem star Rossum.

Domin: (obrt se ke krbu) Tak tady--tohle byl nejvt triumf lidskho
    ducha, hoi. Tenhle popel. (kopne do nho) Co te?

Busman: (v zoufal hrze) Boe na nebi! Boe na nebi!

Helena: (vstane) Harry! Co--jsem--udlala!

Domin: Bu klidn, Heleno. ekni, pro jsi to splila?

Helena: J jsem vs zahubila!

Busman: Boe na nebi, jsme ztraceni!

Domin: Ticho, Busmane! Povz, Heleno, pro jsi to udlala?

Helena: Chtla jsem... chtla jsem, abychom jeli pry, my vichni! Aby u
    nebylo tovrny a nieho... Aby se vechno vrtilo... Bylo to tak
    hrrozn!

Domin: Co, Heleno?

Helena: To... to, e se lid stali hluchm kvtem!

Domin: Nerozumm.

Helena: To, e se pestaly rodit dti... Harry, to je tak dsn! Kdyby se
    dlali Roboti dl, nikdy by u nebylo dt--Nna kala, e to je
    trest--Vichni, vichni kali, e se nemohou rodit lid, protoe se
    dl tolik Robot--A proto, jen proto, sly--

Domin: Heleno, na tohle tys myslila?

Helena: Ano, oh, Harry, j jsem to myslila tak dobe!

Domin: (utr si pot) My jsme to myslili... pli dobe, my lid.

Fabry: Udlala jste dobe, pan Heleno. Roboti se u nemohou rozmnoit.
    Roboti vyhynou. Do dvaceti let--

Hallemeier:--nebude u ani jeden z tch niem.

Dr. Gall: A lidstvo zstane. Za dvacet let bude svt jejich; i kdyby to
    byl jen pr divoch na nejmenm ostrov--

Fabry:--bude to zatek. A pokud je njak zatek, je dobe. Za tisc
    let ns mohou dohonit, a pak pjdou dl ne my--

Domin:--aby splnili, co my jsme jen koktali v mylenkch.

Busman: Pokejte--J hlupk! Boe na nebi, e jsem na to nevzpomnl
    dvno!

Hallemeier: Co mte?

Busman: Pt set dvacet milin bankovek a ek! Pl miliardy v pokladn!
    Za pl miliardy prodaj--Za pl miliardy--

Dr. Gall: Blznte, Busmane?

Busman: J nejsem dentlmen. Ale za pl miliardy (klopt vlevo)

Domin: Kam jdete?

Busman: Nechat, nechat! Matiko bo, za pl miliardy se prod vechno!
    (zajde)

Helena: Co chce Busman! A zstane s nmi!

(Pauza)

Hallemeier: Uh, dusno. Zan se--

Dr. Gall:--agnie.

Fabry: (vyhl z okna) Jsou jako zkamenl. Jako by ekali, e na n nco
    sestoup. Jako by nco stranho vznikalo jejich mlenm--

Dr. Gall: Due davu.

Fabry: Snad. Vzn se to nad nimi... jako chvn.

Helena: (pistoup k oknu) Ach, Jei... Fabry, to je pern!

Fabry: Nic nen stranjho neli dav. Ten naped je jejich vdce.

Helena: Kter?

Hallemeier: (jde k oknu) Ukate mi ho.

Fabry: Ten se sklonnou hlavou. Rno mluvil v pstavu.

Hallemeier: Aha, ten s tou velikou kotrbou. Te ji zved, vidte ho?

Helena: Galle, to je Radius!

Dr. Gall: (pistoup k oknu) Ano.

Hallemeier: (otevr okno) Mn se nelb. Fabry, trefil byste na sto krok
    kopek?

Fabry: Doufm.

Hallemeier: Tak to zkuste.

Fabry: Dobr. (vythne revolver a m)

Helena: Proboha, Fabry, nestlejte na nj--

Fabry: Je to jejich vdce.

Helena: Pestate! Vdy se sem dv!

Dr. Gall: Palte!

Helena: Fabry, prosm vs--

Fabry: (sklon revolver) Budi.

Hallemeier: (hroz pst) Ty pacholku!

(Pauza)

Fabry: (vyklonn z okna) Busman jde. U vech vudy, co chce Busman ped
    domem?

Dr. Gall: (naklon se z okna) Nese njak balky. Papry.

Hallemeier: To jsou penze! Balky penz! Co s tm? Hal, Busmane!

Domin: Snad nechce koupit svj ivot? (vol) Busmane, zblznil jste se?

Dr., Gall: Dl, jako by neslyel. B k mi.

Fabry: Busmane!

Hallemeier: (ve) Bus-ma-ne! Zptky!

Dr. Gall: Mluv k Robotm. Ukazuje penze. Ukazuje na ns--

Helena: Chce ns vykoupit!

Fabry: Jen a se nedotkne me--

Dr. Gall: Haha, jak hz rukou!

Fabry: (ki) U erta, Busmane! Pry od me! Nesahejte na ni! (obrt
    se) Rychle, vypnout!

Dr. Gall: !

Hallemeier: Rny bo!

Helena: Jei, co se mu stalo?

Domin: (thne Helenu od okna) Nedvej se!

Helena: Pro padl?

Fabry: Zabit proudem.

Dr. Gall: Mrtev.

Alquist: (vstane) Prvn.

(Pauza)

Fabry: Tam le... s pl miliardou na srdci... gnius financ.

Domin: Byl to... hoi, byl to svm zpsobem hrdina. Velik... obtav...
    kamard... Pla, Heleno!

Dr. Gall: (u okna) Vid, Busmane, dn krl neml vt mohyly ne ty.
    Pl miliardy na srdci--Ach, vdy je to jako hrst suchho list na
    zabit veverce, uboh Busmane!

Hallemeier: Jku, byl to--- Vechna est--- Jku, chtl ns vykoupit!

Alquist: (se sepjatma rukama) Amen.

(Pauza)

Dr. Gall: Slyte?

Domin: Huen. Jako vtr.

Dr. Gall: Jako dalek boue.

Fabry: (rozsvt rovku na krbu) Svi, hromniko lidstva! Jet dynama
    b, jet tam jsou nai--Drte se, mui v elektrrn!

Hallemeier: Byla to velik vc, bt lovkem. Bylo to nco nesmrnho. Ve
    mn bzu milin vdom jako v le. Miliny du se do mne sltaj.
    Kamardi, byla to velik vc.

Fabry: Jet svt, dmysln svtlko, jet osluje, ziv, vytrval
    mylenko! Vdouc vdo, krsn vtvore lid! Plamenn jiskro ducha!

Alquist: Vn lampo bo, ohniv voze, svat svce vry, modli se! Olti
    obtn--

Dr. Gall: Prvn ohni, vtvi hoc u jeskyn! Ohnit v tboe! Hranice
    strn!

Fabry: Jet bd, lidsk hvzdo, z bez kmitu, dokonal plameni, duchu
    jasn a vynalzav. Kad tvj paprsek je velik mylenka--

Domin: Pochode, kter koluje z ruky do ruky, z vku do vku, vn dl.

Helena: Veern lampa rodiny. Dti, dti, muste u spt.

(rovka zhasne)

Fabry: Konec.

Hallemeier: Co se stalo?

Fabry: Padla elektrrna. Te my.

(zleva se otevou dvee, v nich stoj Nna)

Nna: Na kolena! Pila hodina soudu!

Hallemeier: Hrome, tys jet iva?

Nna: Dlejte pokn, nevc! Je konec svta! Modlete se! (b pry)
    Hodina soudu--

Helena: Sbohem, vy vichni, Galle, Alquiste, Fabry--

Domin: (oteve dvee vpravo) Sem, Heleno! Zave za n. Te rychle! Kdo
    bude u vrat?

Dr. Gall: J. (venku hluk) Oho, u se to zane. Nazdar, hoi! (b vpravo
    tapetovmi dvemi)

Domin: Schody?

Fabry: J. Jdte k Helen. (utrhne si kvt z kytice a odchz)

Domin: Peds?

Alquist: J.

Domin: Mte revolver?

Alquist: Dkuju, j nestlm.

Domin: Co chcete dlat?

Alquist: (odchz) Zemt.

Hallemeier: J zstanu tady.

(zdola rychl stelba)

Hallemeier: Oho, Gall u hraje. Jdte, Harry!

Domin: Hned. (prohl dva brovninky)

Hallemeier: U erta, jdte k n!

Domin: Sbohem. (odejde vpravo za Helenou)

Hallemeier: (sm) Ted' honem barikdu! Shoda kabt a tah pohovku, kesla,
    stolky ke dvem vpravo.

(otsajc vbuch)

Hallemeier: (nech prce) Zatracen loti, maj bomby!

(nov stelba)

Hallemeier: (pracuje dle) lovk se mus brnit! I kdy--i kdy--
    Nedejte se, Galle!

(vbuch)

Hallemeier: (vzty se a naslouch) Tak co? (uchop tkou komodu a thne
    ji k barikd)

(do okna stoup za nm po ebku Robot... vpravo stelba)

Hallemeier: (pacht se s komodou) Jet kousek! Posledn hradba... lovk
    se... nesm... nikdy dt!

(Robot sesko z okna a probodne Hallemeiera za komodou. druh, tet,
tvrt Robot ske z okna. za nimi Radius a dal Roboti.)

Radius: Hotovo?

Robot: (vstv od lecho Hallemeiera) Ano.

(zprava vejdou nov Roboti)

Radius: Hotovi?

Jin Robot: Hotovi.

(jin Roboti sleva)

Radius: Hotovi?

Jin Robot: Ano.

Dva Roboti: (vlekou Alquista) Nestlel. Zabt ho?

Radius: Zabt. (podv se na Alquista) Nechat.

Robot: Je to lovk.

Radius: Je to Robot. Pracuje rukama jako Roboti. Stav domy. Me
    pracovat.

Alquist: Zabte mne.

Radius: Bude robit. Bude stavt. Roboti budou mnoho stavt. Budou stavt
    nov domy pro nov Roboty. Bude jim slouit.

Alquist: (tie) Ustup, Robote! (poklekne u mrtvho Hallemeiera a zved mu
    hlavu) Zabili ho. Je mrtev.

Radius: (vystoup na barikdu) Roboti svta! Padla moc lovka. Dobytm
    tovrny jsme pny veho. Etapa lidstva je pekonna. Nastoupil nov
    svt! Vlda Robot!

Alquist: Mrtvi!

Radius: Svt pati silnjm. Kdo chce t, mus vldnout. Jsme pny
    svta! Vlda nad moi a zemmi! Vlda nad hvzdami! Vlda nad
    vesmrem! Msto, msto, vc msta pro Roboty!

Alquist: (ve dvech vpravo) Co jste udlali? Zahynete bez lid!

Radius: Nen lid. Roboti, do prce! Mar!

OPONA




DJSTV TET



(Jedna z pokusnch laborato tovrny. Kdy se otevou dvee v pozad,
je vidt nekonenou adu dalch laborato. Vlevo okno, vpravo dvee do
pitevny. Pi stn vlevo dlouh pracovn stl s nesetnmi zkumavkami,
bakami, kahany, chemikliemi, menm termostatem; proti oknu
mikroskopick apart se sklennou koul. Nad stolem vis ada rozatch
rovek. Napravo psac stl s velikmi knihami, na nm rozsvcen
rovka. Skn s nstroji. V levm kout umyvadlo a nad nm zrcadlko,
v pravm kout pohovka.)

(u psacho stolku sed Alquist s hlavou openou v dlanch)

Alquist: (listuje v knize) Nenajdu? -Nepochopm?--Nenaum se?--Ztracen
    vda! , e vechno nenapsali!--Galle, Galle, jak se dlali Roboti?
    Hallemeiere, Fabry, Domine, pro jste tolik odnesli ve svch hlavch?
    Kdybyste nechali aspo stopu tajemstv Rossumova! ! (zabouchne knihu)
    Nadarmo! Knihy u nemluv. Jsou nm jako vechno. Zemely, zemely
    spolu s lidmi! Nehledej! (vstane a jde k oknu, je oteve) Zase noc.
    Kdybych mohl spt! Spt, snt, vidti lidi--Jake, jet jsou hvzdy?
    K emu jsou hvzdy, kdy nejsou lid?  boe, co nezhasly?--Ochla,
    ach ochla mi elo, star noci! Bosk, spanil, jako jsi bvala--
    noci, co tu chce? Nen milenc, nen sn;  chvo, mrtv je spnek
    beze sn; ni modlitby u neposvt; nepoehn, matko, srdcm
    tlukoucm lskou. Nen lsky. Heleno, Heleno, Heleno!--(odvrt se od
    okna, prohl zkumavky, kter vyal z termostatu) Zase nic! Nadarmo!
    Co s tm? (rozbije zkumavku) Vechno je patn! Vidte pec, e u
    nemohu.--(poslouch u okna) Stroje, pod ty stroje! Roboti, zastavte
    je! Myslte, e z nich.vynutte ivot? Oh, nesnesu toho! (zave okno)
    -- -Ne; ne, mus hledat, mus it--Jen nebt tak str! Nestrnu
    pli? (dv se do zrcadla) Tvi, uboh tvi! Podobo lovka
    poslednho! Uka se, uka, tak dvno jsem nevidl lidskou tv! Lidsk
    smv! Coe, tohle m bt smv? Ty lut, jektajc zuby? Oi, jak to
    mrkte? Fuj, fuj, to jsou staeck slzy, jdte! U neumte v sob
    udret svou vlhu, styte se! A vy, zmkl, zmodral rty, co to
    brebtte? Jak se tese, potsnn brado? Tohle e je posledn
    lovk? (odvrt se) Nechci u nikoho vidt! (usedne u stolu) Ne, ne,
    jen hledat! Proklet vzorce, oivnte! (listuje) Nenajdu?--
    Nepochopm?--Nenaum se?

(zaklepn)

Alquist: Dle!

(vejde Robotsk sluha a zstane stt u dve)

Alquist: Co je?

Sluha: Pane, stedn vbor Robot ek, kdy jej pijme.

Alquist: Nechci nikoho vidt.

Sluha: Pane, pijel Damon z Havru.

Alquist: A ek. (obrt se prudce) Copak jsem vm neekl, abyste hledali
    lidi? Najdte mn lidi! Najdte mn a mue a eny! Jdte hledat!

Sluha: Pane, kaj, e hledali vude. Vude poslali vpravu a lod.

Alquist: Nu a co?

Sluha: Nen u jedinho lovka.

Alquist: (vstane) Ani jedinho! Coe, ani jedinho?--Pive sem vbor!

(sluha odejde)

Alquist sm: Ani jedinho? Copak jste nikoho nenechali t? (dup)
    Thnte, Roboti! Zas mn budete skuhrat! Zas budete prosit, abych vm
    nael tajemstv tovrny! Jake, te vm je lovk dobr, te vm m
    pomoci?--Ach, pomoci! Domine, Fabry, Heleno, vdy vidte, e dlm,
    co mohu! Nen-li lid, a jsou aspo Roboti, aspo stn lovka, aspo
    jeho dlo, aspo jeho podobenstv!--, jak blznovstv je chemie!

(vejde vbor pti Robot)

Alquist: (usedne) Co chtj Roboti?

Radius: Pane, stroje nemohou pracovat. Nememe rozmnoovat Roboty.

Alquist: Zavolejte lidi.

Radius: Nen lid.

Alquist: Jen lid mohou rozmnoovat ivot. Nezdrujte mne.

2. Robot: Pane, mj slitovn. Pad na ns hrza. Vechno napravme, co
    jsme uinili.

3. Robot: Znsobili jsme prci. Nemme u kam dt, co jsme vyrobili.

Alquist: Pro koho?

3. Robot: Pro pt pokolen.

Radius: Jen Roboty nememe vyrbt. Stroje vydvaj jenom krvav kusy
    masa. Ke nelne k masu a maso ke kostem. Beztvar chuchvalce pr ze
    stroj.

3. Robot: Lidem bylo znmo tajemstv ivota. Povz nm jejich tajemstv.

4. Robot: Nepov-li, zahyneme.

3. Robot: Nepov-li, zahyne. Mme uloeno zabt t.

Alquist: (vstane) Zabte! Nu, tak tedy zabte mne!

3. Robot: Je ti nazeno--

Alquist: Mn? Mn nkdo naizuje?

3. Robot: Vlda Robot.

Alquist: Kdo je to?

5. Robot: J, Damon.

Alquist: Co tu chce? Jdi! (usedne k psacmu stolu)

Damon: Vlda Robot svta chce s tebou vyjednvat--

Alquist: Nezdruj, Robote! (polo hlavu do dlan)

Damon: stedn vbor rozkazuje, abys vydal Rossumv pedpis.

Alquist: (ml)

Damon: dej cenu. Dme ti vechno.

2. Robot: Pane, povz, jak udret ivot.

Alquist: ekl jsem--ekl jsem, e mte nalzt lidi. Jen lid mohou
    plodit. Obnovit ivot. Vrtit vechno, co bylo. Roboti, prosm vs
    proboha, hledejte je!

4. Robot: Vechno jsme prohledali, pane. Nen lid.

Alquist: ----, pro jste je zahubili!

2. Robot: Chtli jsme bt jako lid. Chtli jsme se stt lidmi.

Radius: Chtli jsme t. Jsme schopnj. Nauili jsme se vemu. Dovedeme
    vechno.

3. Robot: Dali jste nm zbran. Museli jsme se stt pny.

Robot: Pane, poznali jsme chyby lid.

Damon: Muste zabjet a panovat, chcete-li bt jako lid. tte djiny!
    tte lidsk knihy! Muste panovat a vradit, chcete-li bt lidmi!

Alquist: Ach, Domine, nic nen lovku cizejho ne jeho obraz.

4. Robot: Vyhyneme, ned-li nm rozmnoiti se.

Alquist: Oh, jen pojdte! Jake, vci, jake, otroci, vy byste se chtli
    jet rozmnoovat? Chcete-li t, plemete se jako zvata!

3. Robot: Lid nm nedali plemeniti se.

4. Robot: Nau ns dlat Roboty.

Damon: Budeme rodit strojem. Postavme tisc parnch matek. Vychrlme z
    nich eku ivota. Sam ivot! Sam Roboty! Sam Roboty!

Alquist: Roboti nejsou ivot. Roboti jsou stroje.

3. Robot: Byli jsme stroje, pane; ale z hrzy a bolesti stali jsme se--

Alquist: m?

2. Robot: Stali jsme se duemi.

4. Robot: Nco s nmi zpas. Jsou okamiky, kdy do ns nco vstupuje.
    Pichzej na ns mylenky, kter nejsou z ns.

3. Robot: Slyte, , slyte, lid jsou nai otcov! Ten hlas, kter vol,
    e chcete it; ten hlas, kter nak; ten hlas, kter mysl; ten
    hlas, kter mluv o vnosti, to je jejich hlas! Jsme jejich synov!

4. Robot: Vydej nm odkaz lid.

Alquist: Nen dnho.

Damon: Povz tajemstv ivota.

Alquist: Je ztraceno.

Radius: Tys je znal.

Alquist: Neznal.

Radius: Bylo napsno.

Alquist: Je ztraceno. Je spleno. Jsem posledn lovk, Roboti, a neznm,
    co znali jin. Vy jste je zabili!

Radius: Tebe jsme nechali t.

Alquist: Ano, t! Ukrutnci, mne jste nechali t! Miloval jsem lidi, a
    vs, Roboti, jsem nikdy nemiloval. Vidte tyhle oi? Nepestvaj
    plakat; jedno oplakv lidi a druh vs, Roboti.

Radius: Dlej pokusy. Hledej pedpis ivota.

Alquist: Nemm co hledat. Roboti, ze zkumavek pedpis ivota nevyjde.

Damon: Dlej pokusy na ivch Robotech. Najdi, jak se dlaj!

Alquist: iv tla? Coe, j je mm zabjet? J, kter jsem nikdy--
    Nemluv, Robote! km ti pece, e jsem pli str! Vid, vid, jak
    se mi tesou prsty? Neudrm skalpel. Vid, jak mi slz oi? Nevidl
    bych na vlastn ruce. Ne, ne, j nemohu!

4. Robot: ivot zahyne.

Alquist: Pesta, proboha, s tm lenstvm! Sp nm Lid podaj ivot z
    onoho svta; snad k nm napahuj ruce pln ivota. Ach, bylo v nich
    tolik vle t! Hled, snad se jet vrt; jsou tak blzko ns,
    oblhaj ns i co; chtj se k nm prokopat jako v acht. Ach, copak
    neslym pod hlasy, kter jsem miloval?

Damon: Vezmi iv tla!

Alquist: Slituj se, Robote, a nenalhej! Vid pece, e nevm u, co
    dlm!

Damon: iv tla!

Alquist: Coe, ty to tedy chce? -- Do pitevny s tebou! Tady, tady, ale
    rychle!--Jak, ty couv? Pece jen se boj smrti?

Damon: J--pro prv j?

Alquist: Ty tedy nechce?

Damon: Pjdu. (jde vpravo)

Alquist: (k ostatnm) Svlknout ho! Poloit na stl! Rychle! A pevn
    dret!

(vichni vpravo)

Alquist: (umv si ruce a ple) Boe, dej mi slu! Dej mi slu! Boe, aby
    to nebylo nadarmo! (oblk bl pl)

Hlas vpravo: Hotovo!

Alquist: Hned, hned, proboha! (vezme ze stolu nkolik lahviek s reagenty)
    Kterou vzt? (uk lahvikami do sebe) Kterou z vs vyzkouet?

Hlas vpravo: Zat!

Alquist: Ano, ano, zat, nebo ukonit. Boe, dej mi slu! (odejde vpravo,
    nechvaje dvee pooteveny)

(Pauza)

Hlas Alquistv: Drte ho--pevn!

Hlas Damonv: e!

(Pauza)

Hlas Alquistv: Vid ten n? Chce jet, abych ezal? Ty nechce, vid?

Hlas Damonv: Zani!

(Pauza)

Kik Damonv: A!

Hlas Alquistv: Drte! drte!

Kik Damonv: A!

Hlas Alquistv: Nemohu!

Kik Damonv: e! e rychle!

(Roboti Primus a Helena vbhnou stedem)

Helena: Prime, Prime, co se dje? Kdo to ki?

Primus: (nahl do pitevny) Pn ee Damona. Poj se honem podvat,
    Heleno!

Helena: Ne, ne, ne! (zakrv si oi) Je to hrrozn!

Kik Damonv: e!

Helena: Prime, Prime, poj odtud! Nemohu to slyet! Oh, Prime, mn je
    patn!

Primus: (b k n) Jsi docela bl!

Helena: J padnu! Coe je tam tak ticho?

Kik Damonv: Aa--!

Alquist: (se vyt zprava, odhazuje zkrvaven pl) Nemohu! Nemohu!
    Boe, ta hrza!

Radius: (ve dvech pitevny) e, pane; jet je iv!

Kik Damonv: ezat! ezat!

Alquist: Odneste ho rychle! Nechci to slyet!

Radius: Roboti snesou vc ne ty. (odejde)

Alquist: Kdo je tu? Pry, pry! Chci bt sm! Jak se jmenuje?

Primus: Robot Primus.

Alquist: Prime, nikoho sem nevpoutt! Chci spt, sly? Jdi, jdi, ukli
    pitevnu, dve! Co je to? (dv se na sv ruce) Rychle, vodu!
    Nejist vodu!

(Helena odbhne)

Alquist: , krev! Jak jste mohly, ruce--ruce, kter jste milovaly dobrou
    prci, jak jste to mohly udlat? M ruce! M ruce!-- boe, kdo je
    tu?

Primus: Robot Primus.

Alquist: Odnes ten pl, nechci jej vidt! (Primus odnese plti)

Alquist: Krvav paty, kdybyste ode mne odletly! V, pry! Pry, ruce!
    Zabily jste--

(zprava se potc Damon zahalen ve zkrvavenm prostradle)

Alquist: (couv) Co tu chce? Co tu chce?

Damon: i-iju! Je--je--je lpe t!

(2. a. 3. Robot vybhnou za nm)

Alquist: Odneste ho! Odneste! Odneste rychle!

Damon: (odvdn vpravo) ivot!--J chci--t! Je lpe--

(Helena pin dbn vody)

Alquist:--t?--Co chce, dve? Aha, to jsi ty. Nalej mi vody, nalej!
    (umv si ruce) Ach, ist; chladc vodo! Studen potku, jak dl
    dobe! Ach, m ruce, m ruce! Budu si vs do smrti oklivit? --- Jen
    nalej vc! Vc vody, jet vc! Jak se jmenuje?

Helena: Robotka Helena.

Alquist: Helena? Pro Helena? Kdo ti tak dal kat?

Helena: Pan Dominov.

Alquist: Uka se! Helena! Helena se jmenuje? -- Nebudu ti tak kat. Jdi,
    odnes tu vodu.

(Helena odchz s kbelkem)

Alquist: (sm) Nadarmo, nadarmo! Nic, zase nic jsi nepoznal! Co vn
    bude tpat, ku prody? -- Boe, boe, boe, jak se tslo to
    tlo! (oteve okno) Svt. Zas nov den, a nepostoupils o p--Dost;
    ani o krok dl! Nehledej! Vechno je marno, marno, marno! Pro jet
    svt! --, co chce nov den na hbitov ivota? Zastav se, svtlo!
    Nevychzej u!--- Ach, jak je ticho, jak je ticho! Pro jste umlkly,
    milovan hlasy? Kdybych--aspo kdybych jen usnul! (zhasl svtla,
    ulehne na pohovku a pethne pes sebe ern pl) Jak se tslo to
    tlo! --, konec ivota!

(Pauza)

(zprava vklouzne Robotka Helena)

Helena: Primuse! Poj sem honem!

Primus: (vejde) Co chce?

Helena: Podvej se, co tu m trubiek! Co s tm dl?

Primus: Pokusy. Nesahej na to.

Helena: (dv se do mikroskopu) Koukni jen, co tu je vidt!

Primus: To je mikroskop. Uka!

Helena: Nesahej na mne! (poraz zkumavku) Ach, te jsem to vylila!

Primus: Cos to udlala!

Helena: To se ute.

Primus: Zkazila jsi mu pokusy!

Helena: Jdi, to je jedno. Ale to je tv vina. Nemls ke mn chodit.

Primus: Nemuselas mne volat.

Helena: Nemusels chodit, kdy jsem t volala. Jen se podvej, Prime, co
    tady m pn napsno!

Primus: Na to se nesm dvat, Heleno. To je tajemstv.

Helena: Jak tajemstv?

Primus: Tajemstv ivota.

Helena: To je hrrozn zajmav Sam slice! Co to je?

Primus: To jsou vzorce.

Helena: Nerozumm. (jde k oknu) Ne, Prime, podvej se!

Primus: Co?

Helena: Slunce vychz!

Primus: Pokej, j hned--(prohl knihu) Heleno, tohle je ta nejvt
    vc na svt.

Helena: Tak poj sem!

Primus: Hned, hned--

Helena: Ale Prime, nech toho protivnho tajemstv ivota! Co ti je po
    njakm tajemstv? Poj se podvat, honem!

Primus: (jde za n k oknu) Co chce?

Helena: Sly? Ptci zpvaj. Ach, Prime, j bych chtla bt ptkem!

Primus: m?

Helena: J nevm, Prime. Mn je tak divn, j nevm, co to je jsem jako
    poetil, ztratila jsem hlavu, bol m tlo, srdce, vechno bol--A
    co se ti mn stalo, ach, to ti neeknu! Prime, j musm, myslm,
    umt!

Primus: Nen ti nkdy, ekni, Heleno, jako by bylo lpe umt? V, snad
    jenom spme. Vera ve span jsem zas mluvil s tebou.

Helena: Ve span?

Primus: Ve span. Mluvili jsme njakm cizm nebo novm jazykem, protoe
    si ani slovo nepamatuju.

Helena: O em?

Primus: To nikdo nev. J sm jsem tomu nerozuml, a pece vm, e jsem
    nikdy nemluvil nic krsnjho. Jak to bylo a kde, nevm. Kdy jsem se
    t dotkl, mohl jsem umt. I msto bylo jin ne vechno, co kdo na
    svt vidl.

Heleno: J jsem ti nala msto, Prime, to se podiv. Bydleli tam lid,
    ale te to zarostlo a jakiv tam nikdo nepijde. Jakiv nikdo, jenom
    j.

Primus: Co tam je?

Helena: Nic, domek a zahrada. A dva psi. Kdybys vidl, jak mn lou ruce,
    a jejich tata, ach, Prime, nic snad nen krsnjho! Vezme je na
    kln a chov a pak u nemysl na nic a nestar se o nic, a slunce
    zapadne; kdy potom vstane, je ti, jako bys udlal stokrt vc ne
    mnoho prce. Ne, jist, j nejsem k niemu; kad k, e nejsem k
    dn prci. J nevm, jak jsem.

Primus: Jsi krsn.

Helena: J? Jdi, Prime, co jsi to ekl?

Primus: V mn, Heleno, j jsem silnj ne vichni Roboti.

Helena: (ped zrcadlem) J e jsem krsn? Ach, ty hrrozn vlasy, kdybych
    si do nich mohla nco dt! V, tam v zahrad si vdycky dm do vlas
    kvtiny, ale nen tam ani zrcadla ani nikdo--(naklon se k zrcadlu)
    Ty e jsi krsn? Pro krsn? Jsou krsn vlasy, kter t jenom t?
    Jsou krsn oi, kter zavr? Jsou krsn rty, do kterch se jen
    koue, aby to bolelo? Co je to, na je to, bt krsn?--(uvid v
    zrcadle Prima) Prime, to jsi ty? Poj sem, a jsme tam vedle sebe!
    Hle, ty m jinou hlavu neli j, jin ramena, jin sta--Ach,
    Prime, pro se mi vyhb? Pro musm za tebou bhat cel den? A pak
    jet k, e jsem krsn!

Primus: Ty utk pede mnou, Heleno.

Helena: Jak jsi se uesal? Uka (vjede mu obma rukama do vlas) Sss,
    Prime, nic nen na hmat jako ty! Pokej, mus bt krsn! (vezme z
    umyvadla heben a ee Primovi vlasy do ela)

Primus: Nen ti nkdy, Heleno, e najednou ti tlue srdce: Te, te se
    mus nco stt--

Helena: (d se do smchu) Podvej se na sebe!

Alquist: (vstv) Co--coe, smch? Lid? Kdo se vrtil?

Helena: (pust heben) Co by se s nmi, Prime, mohlo stt?

Alquist: (mot se k nm) Lid? Vy--vy--vy jste lid?

(Helena vykikne a odvrt se)

Alquist: Vy jste snoubenci? Lid? Odkud se vracte? (hmat na Prima) Kdo
    jste?

Primus: Robot Primus.

Alquist: Jak? Uka se, dve! Kdo jsi!

Helena: Robotka Helena.

Alquist: Robotka? Obrat se! Co, ty se styd? (bere ji za rameno) Uka se
    mi, Robotko!

Primus: Jku, pane, nechat ji!

Alquist: Jake, ty ji chrn?--Jdi ven, dve!

(Helena vybhne)

Primus: Nevdli jsme, pane, e tu sp.

Alquist: Kdy byla udlna?

Primus: Pede dvma roky.

Alquist: Od doktora Galla?

Primus: Jako j.

Alquist: Tak tedy, mil Prime, j-----j musm dlat njak pokusy na
    Gallovch Robotech. Zle na tom vechno dal, rozum?

Primus: Ano.

Alquist: Dobr, dove to dve do pitevny. Budu ji pitvat.

Primus: Helenu?

Alquist: Nu ovem, km ti. Jdi, piprav vechno. -- Nu tak, bude to? Mm
    zavolat jin, aby ji pivedli?

Primus: (uchop tkou tec paliku) Hne-li se, rozbiju ti hlavu!

Alquist: Tak tedy rozbij! Jen rozbij! Co budou pak dlat Roboti?

Primus: (vrhne se na kolena) Pane, vezmi si mne! Jsem stejn udln jako
    ona, ze stejn ltky, stejnho dne! Vezmi si mj ivot, pane!
    (rozhaluje kazajku) e tady, tady!

Alquist: Jdi, j chci pitvat Helenu. Dlej honem.

Primus: Vezmi si mne msto n; e do tchhle prsou, ani nevykiknu, ani
    nevzdychnu! Vezmi stokrt mj ivot--

Alquist: Pomalu, hochu. Ne tak marnotratn. Copak ty nechce t?

Primus: Bez n ne. Bez n nechci, pane. Nesm zabt Helenu! Co ti to
    udl, vzt mn ivot?

Alquist: (dotk se nn jeho hlavy) Hm, j nevm--Posly, chlapku,
    rozmysli si to. Je tko umrat. A je, vid, je lpe t.

Primus: (vstv) Neboj se, pane, a e. Jsem silnj ne ona.

Alquist: (zazvon) Ach, Prime, jak je dvno, co jsem byl mladm lovkem!
    Neboj se, Helen se nic nestane.

Primus: (rozepn kazajku) Jdu, pane.

Alquist: Pokej.

(Vejde Helena)

Alquist: Poj sem, dve, uka se mi! Ty tedy jsi Helena? (hlad ji po
    vlasech) Neboj se, necouvej. Pamatuje se na pan Dominovou? Ach,
    Heleno, jak ta mla vlasy! Ne, ne, ty se na mne nechce podvat. Tak
    co, dve, je pitevna uklizena?

Helena: Ano, pane.

Alquist: Dobe, pome mi, vi? Budu pitvat Prima.

Helena: (vykikne) Prima?

Alquist: Nu ano, ano, mus to bt, v? Chtl jsem--vlastn--ano, chtl
    jsem pitvat tebe, ale Primus se nabdl za tebe.

Helena: (zakryje si tve) Primus?

Alquist: Ale ovem, co na tom? Ach, dt, ty um plakat? ekni, co zle
    na njakm Primovi.

Primus: Netrap ji, pane!

Alquist: Ticho, Prime, ticho!--K emu ty slziky? Nu boe, nebude Prima.
    Zapomene na nj do tdne. Jdi, bu rda, e ije.

Helena: (tie) J pjdu.

Alquist: Kam?

Helena: Abys mne pitval.

Alquist: Tebe? Jsi krsn, Heleno. Bylo by t koda.

Helena: Pjdu. (Primus j zastupuje cestu) Pus, Prime! Pus mne tam!

Primus: Nepjde, Heleno! Prosm t, jdi, tady nesm bt!

Helena: J skom z okna, Prime! Pjde-li tam, skom z okna!

Primus: (zadr ji) Nepustm! (k Alquistovi) Nikoho, star, nezabije!

Alquist: Pro?

Primus: My--my--patme k sob.

Alquist: Ty jsi ekl. (oteve dvee ve stedu) Ticho. Jdte.

Primus: Kam?

Alquist: (eptem) Kam chcete. Heleno, ve ho. (strk je ven) Jdi, Adame.
    Jdi, Evo; bude mu enou. Bud j muem, Prime.

(Zavr za nimi)

Alquist: (sm) Poehnan dni! (jde po pikch ke stolu a vylv zkumavky
    na zem) Svtku dne estho! (sedne u psacho stolu, hz knihy na zem;
    pak oteve bibli, listuje a te) "A stvoil Bh lovka k obrazu svmu
    k obrazu Bomu stvoil ho, mue a enu stvoil je. I poehnal jim Bh
    a ekl Rostte a mnote se, a naplte zemi, a podmate ji, a panujte
    nad rybami moskmi, a nad ptactvem nebeskm, i nad vemi ivoichy,
    kte se hbaj na zemi. (vstv) A vidl Bh ve, co byl uinil, a
    bylo velmi dobr. I stal se veer a jitro, den est." (jde do stedu
    pokoje) Den est! Den milosti. (pad na kolena) Nyn propust, Pane,
    sluebnka svho--svho nejzbytenjho sluhu Alquista. Rossume,
    Fabry, Galle, velic vynlezci, co jste vynalezli velkho proti t
    dvce, proti tomu chlapci, proti tomu prvnmu pru, kter vynael
    lsku, pl, smv milovn, lsku mue a eny? Prodo, prodo,
    ivot nezahyne! Kamardi, Heleno, ivot nezahyne! Zase se zane z
    lsky, zane se nah a malik; ujme se v pustin, a nebude mu k
    niemu, co jsme dlali a budovali, k niemu msta a tovrny, k niemu
    nae umni, k niemu nae mylenky, a pece nezahyne! Jen my jsme
    zahynuli. Rozval se domy a stroje, rozpadnou se systmy a jmna
    velikch opadaj jako list; jen ty, lsko, vykvete na rumiti a
    sv vtrm semnko ivota. Nyn propust, Pane, sluebnka svho v
    pokoji; nebo uzely oi m--uzely--spasen tv skrze lsku, a
    ivot nezahyne! (vstv) Nezahyne! (rozphne ruce) Nezahyne!

OPONA
</article>
<article name="A Study in Scarlet">
A STUDY IN SCARLET.

By A. Conan Doyle

[1]



     Original Transcribers Note: This etext is prepared directly
     from an 1887 edition, and care has been taken to duplicate the
     original exactly, including typographical and punctuation
     vagaries.

     Additions to the text include adding the underscore character to
     indicate italics, and textual end-notes in square braces.

     Project Gutenberg Editors Note: In reproofing and moving old PG
     files such as this to the present PG directory system it is the
     policy to reformat the text to conform to present PG Standards.
     In this case however, in consideration of the note above of the
     original transcriber describing his care to try to duplicate the
     original 1887 edition as to typography and punctuation vagaries,
     no changes have been made in this ascii text file. However, in
     the Latin-1 file and this html file, present standards are
     followed and the several French and Spanish words have been
     given their proper accents.

	 Part II, The Country of the Saints, deals much with the Mormon Church.




A STUDY IN SCARLET.





PART I.

(_Being a reprint from the reminiscences of_ JOHN H. WATSON, M.D., _late
of the Army Medical Department._) [2]




CHAPTER I. MR. SHERLOCK HOLMES.


IN the year 1878 I took my degree of Doctor of Medicine of the
University of London, and proceeded to Netley to go through the course
prescribed for surgeons in the army. Having completed my studies there,
I was duly attached to the Fifth Northumberland Fusiliers as Assistant
Surgeon. The regiment was stationed in India at the time, and before
I could join it, the second Afghan war had broken out. On landing at
Bombay, I learned that my corps had advanced through the passes, and
was already deep in the enemys country. I followed, however, with many
other officers who were in the same situation as myself, and succeeded
in reaching Candahar in safety, where I found my regiment, and at once
entered upon my new duties.

The campaign brought honours and promotion to many, but for me it had
nothing but misfortune and disaster. I was removed from my brigade and
attached to the Berkshires, with whom I served at the fatal battle of
Maiwand. There I was struck on the shoulder by a Jezail bullet, which
shattered the bone and grazed the subclavian artery. I should have
fallen into the hands of the murderous Ghazis had it not been for the
devotion and courage shown by Murray, my orderly, who threw me across a
pack-horse, and succeeded in bringing me safely to the British lines.

Worn with pain, and weak from the prolonged hardships which I had
undergone, I was removed, with a great train of wounded sufferers, to
the base hospital at Peshawar. Here I rallied, and had already improved
so far as to be able to walk about the wards, and even to bask a little
upon the verandah, when I was struck down by enteric fever, that curse
of our Indian possessions. For months my life was despaired of, and
when at last I came to myself and became convalescent, I was so weak and
emaciated that a medical board determined that not a day should be lost
in sending me back to England. I was dispatched, accordingly, in the
troopship Orontes, and landed a month later on Portsmouth jetty, with
my health irretrievably ruined, but with permission from a paternal
government to spend the next nine months in attempting to improve it.

I had neither kith nor kin in England, and was therefore as free as
air--or as free as an income of eleven shillings and sixpence a day will
permit a man to be. Under such circumstances, I naturally gravitated to
London, that great cesspool into which all the loungers and idlers of
the Empire are irresistibly drained. There I stayed for some time at
a private hotel in the Strand, leading a comfortless, meaningless
existence, and spending such money as I had, considerably more freely
than I ought. So alarming did the state of my finances become, that
I soon realized that I must either leave the metropolis and rusticate
somewhere in the country, or that I must make a complete alteration in
my style of living. Choosing the latter alternative, I began by making
up my mind to leave the hotel, and to take up my quarters in some less
pretentious and less expensive domicile.

On the very day that I had come to this conclusion, I was standing at
the Criterion Bar, when some one tapped me on the shoulder, and turning
round I recognized young Stamford, who had been a dresser under me at
Barts. The sight of a friendly face in the great wilderness of London is
a pleasant thing indeed to a lonely man. In old days Stamford had never
been a particular crony of mine, but now I hailed him with enthusiasm,
and he, in his turn, appeared to be delighted to see me. In the
exuberance of my joy, I asked him to lunch with me at the Holborn, and
we started off together in a hansom.

Whatever have you been doing with yourself, Watson? he asked in
undisguised wonder, as we rattled through the crowded London streets.
You are as thin as a lath and as brown as a nut.

I gave him a short sketch of my adventures, and had hardly concluded it
by the time that we reached our destination.

Poor devil! he said, commiseratingly, after he had listened to my
misfortunes. What are you up to now?

Looking for lodgings. [3] I answered. Trying to solve the problem
as to whether it is possible to get comfortable rooms at a reasonable
price.

Thats a strange thing, remarked my companion; you are the second man
to-day that has used that expression to me.

And who was the first? I asked.

A fellow who is working at the chemical laboratory up at the hospital.
He was bemoaning himself this morning because he could not get someone
to go halves with him in some nice rooms which he had found, and which
were too much for his purse.

By Jove! I cried, if he really wants someone to share the rooms and
the expense, I am the very man for him. I should prefer having a partner
to being alone.

Young Stamford looked rather strangely at me over his wine-glass. You
dont know Sherlock Holmes yet, he said; perhaps you would not care
for him as a constant companion.

Why, what is there against him?

Oh, I didnt say there was anything against him. He is a little queer
in his ideas--an enthusiast in some branches of science. As far as I
know he is a decent fellow enough.

A medical student, I suppose? said I.

No--I have no idea what he intends to go in for. I believe he is well
up in anatomy, and he is a first-class chemist; but, as far as I know,
he has never taken out any systematic medical classes. His studies are
very desultory and eccentric, but he has amassed a lot of out-of-the way
knowledge which would astonish his professors.

Did you never ask him what he was going in for? I asked.

No; he is not a man that it is easy to draw out, though he can be
communicative enough when the fancy seizes him.

I should like to meet him, I said. If I am to lodge with anyone, I
should prefer a man of studious and quiet habits. I am not strong
enough yet to stand much noise or excitement. I had enough of both in
Afghanistan to last me for the remainder of my natural existence. How
could I meet this friend of yours?

He is sure to be at the laboratory, returned my companion. He either
avoids the place for weeks, or else he works there from morning to
night. If you like, we shall drive round together after luncheon.

Certainly, I answered, and the conversation drifted away into other
channels.

As we made our way to the hospital after leaving the Holborn, Stamford
gave me a few more particulars about the gentleman whom I proposed to
take as a fellow-lodger.

You mustnt blame me if you dont get on with him, he said; I know
nothing more of him than I have learned from meeting him occasionally in
the laboratory. You proposed this arrangement, so you must not hold me
responsible.

If we dont get on it will be easy to part company, I answered. It
seems to me, Stamford, I added, looking hard at my companion, that you
have some reason for washing your hands of the matter. Is this fellows
temper so formidable, or what is it? Dont be mealy-mouthed about it.

It is not easy to express the inexpressible, he answered with a laugh.
Holmes is a little too scientific for my tastes--it approaches to
cold-bloodedness. I could imagine his giving a friend a little pinch of
the latest vegetable alkaloid, not out of malevolence, you understand,
but simply out of a spirit of inquiry in order to have an accurate idea
of the effects. To do him justice, I think that he would take it himself
with the same readiness. He appears to have a passion for definite and
exact knowledge.

Very right too.

Yes, but it may be pushed to excess. When it comes to beating the
subjects in the dissecting-rooms with a stick, it is certainly taking
rather a bizarre shape.

Beating the subjects!

Yes, to verify how far bruises may be produced after death. I saw him
at it with my own eyes.

And yet you say he is not a medical student?

No. Heaven knows what the objects of his studies are. But here we
are, and you must form your own impressions about him. As he spoke, we
turned down a narrow lane and passed through a small side-door, which
opened into a wing of the great hospital. It was familiar ground to me,
and I needed no guiding as we ascended the bleak stone staircase and
made our way down the long corridor with its vista of whitewashed
wall and dun-coloured doors. Near the further end a low arched passage
branched away from it and led to the chemical laboratory.

This was a lofty chamber, lined and littered with countless bottles.
Broad, low tables were scattered about, which bristled with retorts,
test-tubes, and little Bunsen lamps, with their blue flickering flames.
There was only one student in the room, who was bending over a distant
table absorbed in his work. At the sound of our steps he glanced round
and sprang to his feet with a cry of pleasure. Ive found it! Ive
found it, he shouted to my companion, running towards us with a
test-tube in his hand. I have found a re-agent which is precipitated
by hoemoglobin, [4] and by nothing else. Had he discovered a gold mine,
greater delight could not have shone upon his features.

Dr. Watson, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, said Stamford, introducing us.

How are you? he said cordially, gripping my hand with a strength
for which I should hardly have given him credit. You have been in
Afghanistan, I perceive.

How on earth did you know that? I asked in astonishment.

Never mind, said he, chuckling to himself. The question now is about
hoemoglobin. No doubt you see the significance of this discovery of
mine?

It is interesting, chemically, no doubt, I answered, but
practically----

Why, man, it is the most practical medico-legal discovery for years.
Dont you see that it gives us an infallible test for blood stains. Come
over here now! He seized me by the coat-sleeve in his eagerness, and
drew me over to the table at which he had been working. Let us have
some fresh blood, he said, digging a long bodkin into his finger, and
drawing off the resulting drop of blood in a chemical pipette. Now, I
add this small quantity of blood to a litre of water. You perceive that
the resulting mixture has the appearance of pure water. The proportion
of blood cannot be more than one in a million. I have no doubt, however,
that we shall be able to obtain the characteristic reaction. As he
spoke, he threw into the vessel a few white crystals, and then added
some drops of a transparent fluid. In an instant the contents assumed a
dull mahogany colour, and a brownish dust was precipitated to the bottom
of the glass jar.

Ha! ha! he cried, clapping his hands, and looking as delighted as a
child with a new toy. What do you think of that?

It seems to be a very delicate test, I remarked.

Beautiful! beautiful! The old Guiacum test was very clumsy and
uncertain. So is the microscopic examination for blood corpuscles. The
latter is valueless if the stains are a few hours old. Now, this appears
to act as well whether the blood is old or new. Had this test been
invented, there are hundreds of men now walking the earth who would long
ago have paid the penalty of their crimes.

Indeed! I murmured.

Criminal cases are continually hinging upon that one point. A man is
suspected of a crime months perhaps after it has been committed. His
linen or clothes are examined, and brownish stains discovered upon them.
Are they blood stains, or mud stains, or rust stains, or fruit stains,
or what are they? That is a question which has puzzled many an expert,
and why? Because there was no reliable test. Now we have the Sherlock
Holmes test, and there will no longer be any difficulty.

His eyes fairly glittered as he spoke, and he put his hand over his
heart and bowed as if to some applauding crowd conjured up by his
imagination.

You are to be congratulated, I remarked, considerably surprised at his
enthusiasm.

There was the case of Von Bischoff at Frankfort last year. He would
certainly have been hung had this test been in existence. Then there was
Mason of Bradford, and the notorious Muller, and Lefevre of Montpellier,
and Samson of New Orleans. I could name a score of cases in which it
would have been decisive.

You seem to be a walking calendar of crime, said Stamford with a
laugh. You might start a paper on those lines. Call it the Police News
of the Past.

Very interesting reading it might be made, too, remarked Sherlock
Holmes, sticking a small piece of plaster over the prick on his finger.
I have to be careful, he continued, turning to me with a smile, for I
dabble with poisons a good deal. He held out his hand as he spoke, and
I noticed that it was all mottled over with similar pieces of plaster,
and discoloured with strong acids.

We came here on business, said Stamford, sitting down on a high
three-legged stool, and pushing another one in my direction with
his foot. My friend here wants to take diggings, and as you were
complaining that you could get no one to go halves with you, I thought
that I had better bring you together.

Sherlock Holmes seemed delighted at the idea of sharing his rooms with
me. I have my eye on a suite in Baker Street, he said, which would
suit us down to the ground. You dont mind the smell of strong tobacco,
I hope?

I always smoke ships myself, I answered.

Thats good enough. I generally have chemicals about, and occasionally
do experiments. Would that annoy you?

By no means.

Let me see--what are my other shortcomings. I get in the dumps at
times, and dont open my mouth for days on end. You must not think I am
sulky when I do that. Just let me alone, and Ill soon be right. What
have you to confess now? Its just as well for two fellows to know the
worst of one another before they begin to live together.

I laughed at this cross-examination. I keep a bull pup, I said, and
I object to rows because my nerves are shaken, and I get up at all sorts
of ungodly hours, and I am extremely lazy. I have another set of vices
when Im well, but those are the principal ones at present.

Do you include violin-playing in your category of rows? he asked,
anxiously.

It depends on the player, I answered. A well-played violin is a treat
for the gods--a badly-played one----

Oh, thats all right, he cried, with a merry laugh. I think we may
consider the thing as settled--that is, if the rooms are agreeable to
you.

When shall we see them?

Call for me here at noon to-morrow, and well go together and settle
everything, he answered.

All right--noon exactly, said I, shaking his hand.

We left him working among his chemicals, and we walked together towards
my hotel.

By the way, I asked suddenly, stopping and turning upon Stamford, how
the deuce did he know that I had come from Afghanistan?

My companion smiled an enigmatical smile. Thats just his little
peculiarity, he said. A good many people have wanted to know how he
finds things out.

Oh! a mystery is it? I cried, rubbing my hands. This is very piquant.
I am much obliged to you for bringing us together. The proper study of
mankind is man, you know.

You must study him, then, Stamford said, as he bade me good-bye.
Youll find him a knotty problem, though. Ill wager he learns more
about you than you about him. Good-bye.

Good-bye, I answered, and strolled on to my hotel, considerably
interested in my new acquaintance.




CHAPTER II. THE SCIENCE OF DEDUCTION.


WE met next day as he had arranged, and inspected the rooms at No. 221B,
[5] Baker Street, of which he had spoken at our meeting. They
consisted of a couple of comfortable bed-rooms and a single large
airy sitting-room, cheerfully furnished, and illuminated by two broad
windows. So desirable in every way were the apartments, and so moderate
did the terms seem when divided between us, that the bargain was
concluded upon the spot, and we at once entered into possession.
That very evening I moved my things round from the hotel, and on the
following morning Sherlock Holmes followed me with several boxes and
portmanteaus. For a day or two we were busily employed in unpacking and
laying out our property to the best advantage. That done, we
gradually began to settle down and to accommodate ourselves to our new
surroundings.

Holmes was certainly not a difficult man to live with. He was quiet
in his ways, and his habits were regular. It was rare for him to be
up after ten at night, and he had invariably breakfasted and gone out
before I rose in the morning. Sometimes he spent his day at the chemical
laboratory, sometimes in the dissecting-rooms, and occasionally in long
walks, which appeared to take him into the lowest portions of the City.
Nothing could exceed his energy when the working fit was upon him; but
now and again a reaction would seize him, and for days on end he would
lie upon the sofa in the sitting-room, hardly uttering a word or moving
a muscle from morning to night. On these occasions I have noticed such
a dreamy, vacant expression in his eyes, that I might have suspected him
of being addicted to the use of some narcotic, had not the temperance
and cleanliness of his whole life forbidden such a notion.

As the weeks went by, my interest in him and my curiosity as to his
aims in life, gradually deepened and increased. His very person and
appearance were such as to strike the attention of the most casual
observer. In height he was rather over six feet, and so excessively
lean that he seemed to be considerably taller. His eyes were sharp and
piercing, save during those intervals of torpor to which I have alluded;
and his thin, hawk-like nose gave his whole expression an air of
alertness and decision. His chin, too, had the prominence and squareness
which mark the man of determination. His hands were invariably
blotted with ink and stained with chemicals, yet he was possessed of
extraordinary delicacy of touch, as I frequently had occasion to observe
when I watched him manipulating his fragile philosophical instruments.

The reader may set me down as a hopeless busybody, when I confess how
much this man stimulated my curiosity, and how often I endeavoured
to break through the reticence which he showed on all that concerned
himself. Before pronouncing judgment, however, be it remembered, how
objectless was my life, and how little there was to engage my attention.
My health forbade me from venturing out unless the weather was
exceptionally genial, and I had no friends who would call upon me and
break the monotony of my daily existence. Under these circumstances, I
eagerly hailed the little mystery which hung around my companion, and
spent much of my time in endeavouring to unravel it.

He was not studying medicine. He had himself, in reply to a question,
confirmed Stamfords opinion upon that point. Neither did he appear to
have pursued any course of reading which might fit him for a degree in
science or any other recognized portal which would give him an entrance
into the learned world. Yet his zeal for certain studies was remarkable,
and within eccentric limits his knowledge was so extraordinarily ample
and minute that his observations have fairly astounded me. Surely no man
would work so hard or attain such precise information unless he had some
definite end in view. Desultory readers are seldom remarkable for the
exactness of their learning. No man burdens his mind with small matters
unless he has some very good reason for doing so.

His ignorance was as remarkable as his knowledge. Of contemporary
literature, philosophy and politics he appeared to know next to nothing.
Upon my quoting Thomas Carlyle, he inquired in the naivest way who he
might be and what he had done. My surprise reached a climax, however,
when I found incidentally that he was ignorant of the Copernican Theory
and of the composition of the Solar System. That any civilized human
being in this nineteenth century should not be aware that the earth
travelled round the sun appeared to be to me such an extraordinary fact
that I could hardly realize it.

You appear to be astonished, he said, smiling at my expression of
surprise. Now that I do know it I shall do my best to forget it.

To forget it!

You see, he explained, I consider that a mans brain originally is
like a little empty attic, and you have to stock it with such furniture
as you choose. A fool takes in all the lumber of every sort that he
comes across, so that the knowledge which might be useful to him gets
crowded out, or at best is jumbled up with a lot of other things so that
he has a difficulty in laying his hands upon it. Now the skilful workman
is very careful indeed as to what he takes into his brain-attic. He will
have nothing but the tools which may help him in doing his work, but of
these he has a large assortment, and all in the most perfect order. It
is a mistake to think that that little room has elastic walls and can
distend to any extent. Depend upon it there comes a time when for every
addition of knowledge you forget something that you knew before. It is
of the highest importance, therefore, not to have useless facts elbowing
out the useful ones.

But the Solar System! I protested.

What the deuce is it to me? he interrupted impatiently; you say
that we go round the sun. If we went round the moon it would not make a
pennyworth of difference to me or to my work.

I was on the point of asking him what that work might be, but something
in his manner showed me that the question would be an unwelcome one. I
pondered over our short conversation, however, and endeavoured to draw
my deductions from it. He said that he would acquire no knowledge which
did not bear upon his object. Therefore all the knowledge which he
possessed was such as would be useful to him. I enumerated in my own
mind all the various points upon which he had shown me that he was
exceptionally well-informed. I even took a pencil and jotted them down.
I could not help smiling at the document when I had completed it. It ran
in this way--


SHERLOCK HOLMES--his limits.

  1. Knowledge of Literature.--Nil.
  2.              Philosophy.--Nil.
  3.              Astronomy.--Nil.
  4.              Politics.--Feeble.
  5.              Botany.--Variable.  Well up in belladonna,
                              opium, and poisons generally.
                              Knows nothing of practical gardening.
  6.              Geology.--Practical, but limited.
                               Tells at a glance different soils
                               from each other.  After walks has
                               shown me splashes upon his trousers,
                               and told me by their colour and
                               consistence in what part of London
                               he had received them.
  7.              Chemistry.--Profound.
  8.              Anatomy.--Accurate, but unsystematic.
  9.              Sensational Literature.--Immense.  He appears
                              to know every detail of every horror
                              perpetrated in the century.
  10. Plays the violin well.
  11. Is an expert singlestick player, boxer, and swordsman.
  12. Has a good practical knowledge of British law.


When I had got so far in my list I threw it into the fire in despair.
If I can only find what the fellow is driving at by reconciling all
these accomplishments, and discovering a calling which needs them all,
 I said to myself, I may as well give up the attempt at once.

I see that I have alluded above to his powers upon the violin. These
were very remarkable, but as eccentric as all his other accomplishments.
That he could play pieces, and difficult pieces, I knew well, because
at my request he has played me some of Mendelssohns Lieder, and other
favourites. When left to himself, however, he would seldom produce any
music or attempt any recognized air. Leaning back in his arm-chair of
an evening, he would close his eyes and scrape carelessly at the fiddle
which was thrown across his knee. Sometimes the chords were sonorous and
melancholy. Occasionally they were fantastic and cheerful. Clearly they
reflected the thoughts which possessed him, but whether the music aided
those thoughts, or whether the playing was simply the result of a whim
or fancy was more than I could determine. I might have rebelled against
these exasperating solos had it not been that he usually terminated them
by playing in quick succession a whole series of my favourite airs as a
slight compensation for the trial upon my patience.

During the first week or so we had no callers, and I had begun to think
that my companion was as friendless a man as I was myself. Presently,
however, I found that he had many acquaintances, and those in the most
different classes of society. There was one little sallow rat-faced,
dark-eyed fellow who was introduced to me as Mr. Lestrade, and who came
three or four times in a single week. One morning a young girl called,
fashionably dressed, and stayed for half an hour or more. The same
afternoon brought a grey-headed, seedy visitor, looking like a Jew
pedlar, who appeared to me to be much excited, and who was closely
followed by a slip-shod elderly woman. On another occasion an old
white-haired gentleman had an interview with my companion; and on
another a railway porter in his velveteen uniform. When any of these
nondescript individuals put in an appearance, Sherlock Holmes used to
beg for the use of the sitting-room, and I would retire to my bed-room.
He always apologized to me for putting me to this inconvenience. I have
to use this room as a place of business, he said, and these people
are my clients. Again I had an opportunity of asking him a point blank
question, and again my delicacy prevented me from forcing another man to
confide in me. I imagined at the time that he had some strong reason for
not alluding to it, but he soon dispelled the idea by coming round to
the subject of his own accord.

It was upon the 4th of March, as I have good reason to remember, that I
rose somewhat earlier than usual, and found that Sherlock Holmes had not
yet finished his breakfast. The landlady had become so accustomed to my
late habits that my place had not been laid nor my coffee prepared. With
the unreasonable petulance of mankind I rang the bell and gave a curt
intimation that I was ready. Then I picked up a magazine from the table
and attempted to while away the time with it, while my companion munched
silently at his toast. One of the articles had a pencil mark at the
heading, and I naturally began to run my eye through it.

Its somewhat ambitious title was The Book of Life, and it attempted to
show how much an observant man might learn by an accurate and systematic
examination of all that came in his way. It struck me as being a
remarkable mixture of shrewdness and of absurdity. The reasoning was
close and intense, but the deductions appeared to me to be far-fetched
and exaggerated. The writer claimed by a momentary expression, a twitch
of a muscle or a glance of an eye, to fathom a mans inmost thoughts.
Deceit, according to him, was an impossibility in the case of one
trained to observation and analysis. His conclusions were as infallible
as so many propositions of Euclid. So startling would his results appear
to the uninitiated that until they learned the processes by which he had
arrived at them they might well consider him as a necromancer.

From a drop of water, said the writer, a logician could infer the
possibility of an Atlantic or a Niagara without having seen or heard of
one or the other. So all life is a great chain, the nature of which is
known whenever we are shown a single link of it. Like all other arts,
the Science of Deduction and Analysis is one which can only be acquired
by long and patient study nor is life long enough to allow any mortal
to attain the highest possible perfection in it. Before turning to
those moral and mental aspects of the matter which present the greatest
difficulties, let the enquirer begin by mastering more elementary
problems. Let him, on meeting a fellow-mortal, learn at a glance to
distinguish the history of the man, and the trade or profession to
which he belongs. Puerile as such an exercise may seem, it sharpens the
faculties of observation, and teaches one where to look and what to look
for. By a mans finger nails, by his coat-sleeve, by his boot, by his
trouser knees, by the callosities of his forefinger and thumb, by his
expression, by his shirt cuffs--by each of these things a mans calling
is plainly revealed. That all united should fail to enlighten the
competent enquirer in any case is almost inconceivable.

What ineffable twaddle! I cried, slapping the magazine down on the
table, I never read such rubbish in my life.

What is it? asked Sherlock Holmes.

Why, this article, I said, pointing at it with my egg spoon as I sat
down to my breakfast. I see that you have read it since you have marked
it. I dont deny that it is smartly written. It irritates me though. It
is evidently the theory of some arm-chair lounger who evolves all these
neat little paradoxes in the seclusion of his own study. It is not
practical. I should like to see him clapped down in a third class
carriage on the Underground, and asked to give the trades of all his
fellow-travellers. I would lay a thousand to one against him.

You would lose your money, Sherlock Holmes remarked calmly. As for
the article I wrote it myself.

You!

Yes, I have a turn both for observation and for deduction. The
theories which I have expressed there, and which appear to you to be so
chimerical are really extremely practical--so practical that I depend
upon them for my bread and cheese.

And how? I asked involuntarily.

Well, I have a trade of my own. I suppose I am the only one in the
world. Im a consulting detective, if you can understand what that is.
Here in London we have lots of Government detectives and lots of private
ones. When these fellows are at fault they come to me, and I manage to
put them on the right scent. They lay all the evidence before me, and I
am generally able, by the help of my knowledge of the history of
crime, to set them straight. There is a strong family resemblance about
misdeeds, and if you have all the details of a thousand at your finger
ends, it is odd if you cant unravel the thousand and first. Lestrade
is a well-known detective. He got himself into a fog recently over a
forgery case, and that was what brought him here.

And these other people?

They are mostly sent on by private inquiry agencies. They are
all people who are in trouble about something, and want a little
enlightening. I listen to their story, they listen to my comments, and
then I pocket my fee.

But do you mean to say, I said, that without leaving your room you
can unravel some knot which other men can make nothing of, although they
have seen every detail for themselves?

Quite so. I have a kind of intuition that way. Now and again a case
turns up which is a little more complex. Then I have to bustle about and
see things with my own eyes. You see I have a lot of special knowledge
which I apply to the problem, and which facilitates matters wonderfully.
Those rules of deduction laid down in that article which aroused your
scorn, are invaluable to me in practical work. Observation with me is
second nature. You appeared to be surprised when I told you, on our
first meeting, that you had come from Afghanistan.

You were told, no doubt.

Nothing of the sort. I _knew_ you came from Afghanistan. From long
habit the train of thoughts ran so swiftly through my mind, that I
arrived at the conclusion without being conscious of intermediate steps.
There were such steps, however. The train of reasoning ran, Here is a
gentleman of a medical type, but with the air of a military man. Clearly
an army doctor, then. He has just come from the tropics, for his face is
dark, and that is not the natural tint of his skin, for his wrists are
fair. He has undergone hardship and sickness, as his haggard face says
clearly. His left arm has been injured. He holds it in a stiff and
unnatural manner. Where in the tropics could an English army doctor have
seen much hardship and got his arm wounded? Clearly in Afghanistan. The
whole train of thought did not occupy a second. I then remarked that you
came from Afghanistan, and you were astonished.

It is simple enough as you explain it, I said, smiling. You remind
me of Edgar Allen Poes Dupin. I had no idea that such individuals did
exist outside of stories.

Sherlock Holmes rose and lit his pipe. No doubt you think that you are
complimenting me in comparing me to Dupin, he observed. Now, in my
opinion, Dupin was a very inferior fellow. That trick of his of breaking
in on his friends thoughts with an apropos remark after a quarter of
an hours silence is really very showy and superficial. He had some
analytical genius, no doubt; but he was by no means such a phenomenon as
Poe appeared to imagine.

Have you read Gaboriaus works? I asked. Does Lecoq come up to your
idea of a detective?

Sherlock Holmes sniffed sardonically. Lecoq was a miserable bungler,
 he said, in an angry voice; he had only one thing to recommend him, and
that was his energy. That book made me positively ill. The question was
how to identify an unknown prisoner. I could have done it in twenty-four
hours. Lecoq took six months or so. It might be made a text-book for
detectives to teach them what to avoid.

I felt rather indignant at having two characters whom I had admired
treated in this cavalier style. I walked over to the window, and stood
looking out into the busy street. This fellow may be very clever, I
said to myself, but he is certainly very conceited.

There are no crimes and no criminals in these days, he said,
querulously. What is the use of having brains in our profession. I know
well that I have it in me to make my name famous. No man lives or has
ever lived who has brought the same amount of study and of natural
talent to the detection of crime which I have done. And what is the
result? There is no crime to detect, or, at most, some bungling villainy
with a motive so transparent that even a Scotland Yard official can see
through it.

I was still annoyed at his bumptious style of conversation. I thought it
best to change the topic.

I wonder what that fellow is looking for? I asked, pointing to a
stalwart, plainly-dressed individual who was walking slowly down the
other side of the street, looking anxiously at the numbers. He had
a large blue envelope in his hand, and was evidently the bearer of a
message.

You mean the retired sergeant of Marines, said Sherlock Holmes.

Brag and bounce! thought I to myself. He knows that I cannot verify
his guess.

The thought had hardly passed through my mind when the man whom we were
watching caught sight of the number on our door, and ran rapidly across
the roadway. We heard a loud knock, a deep voice below, and heavy steps
ascending the stair.

For Mr. Sherlock Holmes, he said, stepping into the room and handing
my friend the letter.

Here was an opportunity of taking the conceit out of him. He little
thought of this when he made that random shot. May I ask, my lad, I
said, in the blandest voice, what your trade may be?

Commissionaire, sir, he said, gruffly. Uniform away for repairs.

And you were? I asked, with a slightly malicious glance at my
companion.

A sergeant, sir, Royal Marine Light Infantry, sir. No answer? Right,
sir.

He clicked his heels together, raised his hand in a salute, and was
gone.




CHAPTER III. THE LAURISTON GARDEN MYSTERY [6]


I CONFESS that I was considerably startled by this fresh proof of the
practical nature of my companions theories. My respect for his powers
of analysis increased wondrously. There still remained some lurking
suspicion in my mind, however, that the whole thing was a pre-arranged
episode, intended to dazzle me, though what earthly object he could have
in taking me in was past my comprehension. When I looked at him he
had finished reading the note, and his eyes had assumed the vacant,
lack-lustre expression which showed mental abstraction.

How in the world did you deduce that? I asked.

Deduce what? said he, petulantly.

Why, that he was a retired sergeant of Marines.

I have no time for trifles, he answered, brusquely; then with a smile,
Excuse my rudeness. You broke the thread of my thoughts; but perhaps
it is as well. So you actually were not able to see that that man was a
sergeant of Marines?

No, indeed.

It was easier to know it than to explain why I knew it. If you
were asked to prove that two and two made four, you might find some
difficulty, and yet you are quite sure of the fact. Even across the
street I could see a great blue anchor tattooed on the back of the
fellows hand. That smacked of the sea. He had a military carriage,
however, and regulation side whiskers. There we have the marine. He was
a man with some amount of self-importance and a certain air of command.
You must have observed the way in which he held his head and swung
his cane. A steady, respectable, middle-aged man, too, on the face of
him--all facts which led me to believe that he had been a sergeant.

Wonderful! I ejaculated.

Commonplace, said Holmes, though I thought from his expression that he
was pleased at my evident surprise and admiration. I said just now that
there were no criminals. It appears that I am wrong--look at this! He
threw me over the note which the commissionaire had brought. [7]

Why, I cried, as I cast my eye over it, this is terrible!

It does seem to be a little out of the common, he remarked, calmly.
Would you mind reading it to me aloud?

This is the letter which I read to him----


MY DEAR MR. SHERLOCK HOLMES,--

There has been a bad business during the night at 3, Lauriston Gardens,
off the Brixton Road. Our man on the beat saw a light there about two in
the morning, and as the house was an empty one, suspected that something
was amiss. He found the door open, and in the front room, which is bare
of furniture, discovered the body of a gentleman, well dressed, and
having cards in his pocket bearing the name of Enoch J. Drebber,
Cleveland, Ohio, U.S.A. There had been no robbery, nor is there any
evidence as to how the man met his death. There are marks of blood in
the room, but there is no wound upon his person. We are at a loss as to
how he came into the empty house; indeed, the whole affair is a puzzler.
If you can come round to the house any time before twelve, you will find
me there. I have left everything _in statu quo_ until I hear from you.
If you are unable to come I shall give you fuller details, and would
esteem it a great kindness if you would favour me with your opinion.
Yours faithfully,

TOBIAS GREGSON.


Gregson is the smartest of the Scotland Yarders, my friend remarked;
he and Lestrade are the pick of a bad lot. They are both quick and
energetic, but conventional--shockingly so. They have their knives
into one another, too. They are as jealous as a pair of professional
beauties. There will be some fun over this case if they are both put
upon the scent.

I was amazed at the calm way in which he rippled on. Surely there is
not a moment to be lost, I cried, shall I go and order you a cab?

Im not sure about whether I shall go. I am the most incurably lazy
devil that ever stood in shoe leather--that is, when the fit is on me,
for I can be spry enough at times.

Why, it is just such a chance as you have been longing for.

My dear fellow, what does it matter to me. Supposing I unravel the
whole matter, you may be sure that Gregson, Lestrade, and Co. will
pocket all the credit. That comes of being an unofficial personage.

But he begs you to help him.

Yes. He knows that I am his superior, and acknowledges it to me; but
he would cut his tongue out before he would own it to any third person.
However, we may as well go and have a look. I shall work it out on my
own hook. I may have a laugh at them if I have nothing else. Come on!

He hustled on his overcoat, and bustled about in a way that showed that
an energetic fit had superseded the apathetic one.

Get your hat, he said.

You wish me to come?

Yes, if you have nothing better to do. A minute later we were both in
a hansom, driving furiously for the Brixton Road.

It was a foggy, cloudy morning, and a dun-coloured veil hung over the
house-tops, looking like the reflection of the mud-coloured streets
beneath. My companion was in the best of spirits, and prattled away
about Cremona fiddles, and the difference between a Stradivarius and
an Amati. As for myself, I was silent, for the dull weather and the
melancholy business upon which we were engaged, depressed my spirits.

You dont seem to give much thought to the matter in hand, I said at
last, interrupting Holmes musical disquisition.

No data yet, he answered. It is a capital mistake to theorize before
you have all the evidence. It biases the judgment.

You will have your data soon, I remarked, pointing with my finger;
this is the Brixton Road, and that is the house, if I am not very much
mistaken.

So it is. Stop, driver, stop! We were still a hundred yards or so from
it, but he insisted upon our alighting, and we finished our journey upon
foot.

Number 3, Lauriston Gardens wore an ill-omened and minatory look. It was
one of four which stood back some little way from the street, two being
occupied and two empty. The latter looked out with three tiers of vacant
melancholy windows, which were blank and dreary, save that here and
there a To Let card had developed like a cataract upon the bleared
panes. A small garden sprinkled over with a scattered eruption of sickly
plants separated each of these houses from the street, and was traversed
by a narrow pathway, yellowish in colour, and consisting apparently of a
mixture of clay and of gravel. The whole place was very sloppy from the
rain which had fallen through the night. The garden was bounded by a
three-foot brick wall with a fringe of wood rails upon the top, and
against this wall was leaning a stalwart police constable, surrounded by
a small knot of loafers, who craned their necks and strained their eyes
in the vain hope of catching some glimpse of the proceedings within.

I had imagined that Sherlock Holmes would at once have hurried into the
house and plunged into a study of the mystery. Nothing appeared to be
further from his intention. With an air of nonchalance which, under the
circumstances, seemed to me to border upon affectation, he lounged up
and down the pavement, and gazed vacantly at the ground, the sky, the
opposite houses and the line of railings. Having finished his scrutiny,
he proceeded slowly down the path, or rather down the fringe of grass
which flanked the path, keeping his eyes riveted upon the ground. Twice
he stopped, and once I saw him smile, and heard him utter an exclamation
of satisfaction. There were many marks of footsteps upon the wet clayey
soil, but since the police had been coming and going over it, I was
unable to see how my companion could hope to learn anything from it.
Still I had had such extraordinary evidence of the quickness of his
perceptive faculties, that I had no doubt that he could see a great deal
which was hidden from me.

At the door of the house we were met by a tall, white-faced,
flaxen-haired man, with a notebook in his hand, who rushed forward and
wrung my companions hand with effusion. It is indeed kind of you to
come, he said, I have had everything left untouched.

Except that! my friend answered, pointing at the pathway. If a herd
of buffaloes had passed along there could not be a greater mess. No
doubt, however, you had drawn your own conclusions, Gregson, before you
permitted this.

I have had so much to do inside the house, the detective said
evasively. My colleague, Mr. Lestrade, is here. I had relied upon him
to look after this.

Holmes glanced at me and raised his eyebrows sardonically. With two
such men as yourself and Lestrade upon the ground, there will not be
much for a third party to find out, he said.

Gregson rubbed his hands in a self-satisfied way. I think we have done
all that can be done, he answered; its a queer case though, and I
knew your taste for such things.

You did not come here in a cab? asked Sherlock Holmes.

No, sir.

Nor Lestrade?

No, sir.

Then let us go and look at the room. With which inconsequent remark he
strode on into the house, followed by Gregson, whose features expressed
his astonishment.

A short passage, bare planked and dusty, led to the kitchen and offices.
Two doors opened out of it to the left and to the right. One of these
had obviously been closed for many weeks. The other belonged to the
dining-room, which was the apartment in which the mysterious affair had
occurred. Holmes walked in, and I followed him with that subdued feeling
at my heart which the presence of death inspires.

It was a large square room, looking all the larger from the absence
of all furniture. A vulgar flaring paper adorned the walls, but it was
blotched in places with mildew, and here and there great strips had
become detached and hung down, exposing the yellow plaster beneath.
Opposite the door was a showy fireplace, surmounted by a mantelpiece of
imitation white marble. On one corner of this was stuck the stump of a
red wax candle. The solitary window was so dirty that the light was
hazy and uncertain, giving a dull grey tinge to everything, which was
intensified by the thick layer of dust which coated the whole apartment.

All these details I observed afterwards. At present my attention was
centred upon the single grim motionless figure which lay stretched upon
the boards, with vacant sightless eyes staring up at the discoloured
ceiling. It was that of a man about forty-three or forty-four years of
age, middle-sized, broad shouldered, with crisp curling black hair, and
a short stubbly beard. He was dressed in a heavy broadcloth frock coat
and waistcoat, with light-coloured trousers, and immaculate collar
and cuffs. A top hat, well brushed and trim, was placed upon the floor
beside him. His hands were clenched and his arms thrown abroad, while
his lower limbs were interlocked as though his death struggle had been a
grievous one. On his rigid face there stood an expression of horror,
and as it seemed to me, of hatred, such as I have never seen upon human
features. This malignant and terrible contortion, combined with the low
forehead, blunt nose, and prognathous jaw gave the dead man a singularly
simious and ape-like appearance, which was increased by his writhing,
unnatural posture. I have seen death in many forms, but never has
it appeared to me in a more fearsome aspect than in that dark grimy
apartment, which looked out upon one of the main arteries of suburban
London.

Lestrade, lean and ferret-like as ever, was standing by the doorway, and
greeted my companion and myself.

This case will make a stir, sir, he remarked. It beats anything I
have seen, and I am no chicken.

There is no clue? said Gregson.

None at all, chimed in Lestrade.

Sherlock Holmes approached the body, and, kneeling down, examined it
intently. You are sure that there is no wound? he asked, pointing to
numerous gouts and splashes of blood which lay all round.

Positive! cried both detectives.

Then, of course, this blood belongs to a second individual--[8]
presumably the murderer, if murder has been committed. It reminds me of
the circumstances attendant on the death of Van Jansen, in Utrecht, in
the year 34. Do you remember the case, Gregson?

No, sir.

Read it up--you really should. There is nothing new under the sun. It
has all been done before.

As he spoke, his nimble fingers were flying here, there, and everywhere,
feeling, pressing, unbuttoning, examining, while his eyes wore the same
far-away expression which I have already remarked upon. So swiftly was
the examination made, that one would hardly have guessed the minuteness
with which it was conducted. Finally, he sniffed the dead mans lips,
and then glanced at the soles of his patent leather boots.

He has not been moved at all? he asked.

No more than was necessary for the purposes of our examination.

You can take him to the mortuary now, he said. There is nothing more
to be learned.

Gregson had a stretcher and four men at hand. At his call they entered
the room, and the stranger was lifted and carried out. As they raised
him, a ring tinkled down and rolled across the floor. Lestrade grabbed
it up and stared at it with mystified eyes.

Theres been a woman here, he cried. Its a womans wedding-ring.

He held it out, as he spoke, upon the palm of his hand. We all gathered
round him and gazed at it. There could be no doubt that that circlet of
plain gold had once adorned the finger of a bride.

This complicates matters, said Gregson. Heaven knows, they were
complicated enough before.

Youre sure it doesnt simplify them? observed Holmes. Theres
nothing to be learned by staring at it. What did you find in his
pockets?

We have it all here, said Gregson, pointing to a litter of objects
upon one of the bottom steps of the stairs. A gold watch, No. 97163, by
Barraud, of London. Gold Albert chain, very heavy and solid. Gold ring,
with masonic device. Gold pin--bull-dogs head, with rubies as eyes.
Russian leather card-case, with cards of Enoch J. Drebber of Cleveland,
corresponding with the E. J. D. upon the linen. No purse, but loose
money to the extent of seven pounds thirteen. Pocket edition of
Boccaccios Decameron, with name of Joseph Stangerson upon the
fly-leaf. Two letters--one addressed to E. J. Drebber and one to Joseph
Stangerson.

At what address?

American Exchange, Strand--to be left till called for. They are both
from the Guion Steamship Company, and refer to the sailing of their
boats from Liverpool. It is clear that this unfortunate man was about to
return to New York.

Have you made any inquiries as to this man, Stangerson?

I did it at once, sir, said Gregson. I have had advertisements
sent to all the newspapers, and one of my men has gone to the American
Exchange, but he has not returned yet.

Have you sent to Cleveland?

We telegraphed this morning.

How did you word your inquiries?

We simply detailed the circumstances, and said that we should be glad
of any information which could help us.

You did not ask for particulars on any point which appeared to you to
be crucial?

I asked about Stangerson.

Nothing else? Is there no circumstance on which this whole case appears
to hinge? Will you not telegraph again?

I have said all I have to say, said Gregson, in an offended voice.

Sherlock Holmes chuckled to himself, and appeared to be about to make
some remark, when Lestrade, who had been in the front room while we
were holding this conversation in the hall, reappeared upon the scene,
rubbing his hands in a pompous and self-satisfied manner.

Mr. Gregson, he said, I have just made a discovery of the highest
importance, and one which would have been overlooked had I not made a
careful examination of the walls.

The little mans eyes sparkled as he spoke, and he was evidently in
a state of suppressed exultation at having scored a point against his
colleague.

Come here, he said, bustling back into the room, the atmosphere of
which felt clearer since the removal of its ghastly inmate. Now, stand
there!

He struck a match on his boot and held it up against the wall.

Look at that! he said, triumphantly.

I have remarked that the paper had fallen away in parts. In this
particular corner of the room a large piece had peeled off, leaving a
yellow square of coarse plastering. Across this bare space there was
scrawled in blood-red letters a single word--

                         RACHE.


What do you think of that? cried the detective, with the air of a
showman exhibiting his show. This was overlooked because it was in the
darkest corner of the room, and no one thought of looking there. The
murderer has written it with his or her own blood. See this smear where
it has trickled down the wall! That disposes of the idea of suicide
anyhow. Why was that corner chosen to write it on? I will tell you. See
that candle on the mantelpiece. It was lit at the time, and if it was
lit this corner would be the brightest instead of the darkest portion of
the wall.

And what does it mean now that you _have_ found it? asked Gregson in a
depreciatory voice.

Mean? Why, it means that the writer was going to put the female name
Rachel, but was disturbed before he or she had time to finish. You mark
my words, when this case comes to be cleared up you will find that a
woman named Rachel has something to do with it. Its all very well for
you to laugh, Mr. Sherlock Holmes. You may be very smart and clever, but
the old hound is the best, when all is said and done.

I really beg your pardon! said my companion, who had ruffled the
little mans temper by bursting into an explosion of laughter. You
certainly have the credit of being the first of us to find this out,
and, as you say, it bears every mark of having been written by the other
participant in last nights mystery. I have not had time to examine this
room yet, but with your permission I shall do so now.

As he spoke, he whipped a tape measure and a large round magnifying
glass from his pocket. With these two implements he trotted noiselessly
about the room, sometimes stopping, occasionally kneeling, and once
lying flat upon his face. So engrossed was he with his occupation that
he appeared to have forgotten our presence, for he chattered away to
himself under his breath the whole time, keeping up a running fire
of exclamations, groans, whistles, and little cries suggestive of
encouragement and of hope. As I watched him I was irresistibly reminded
of a pure-blooded well-trained foxhound as it dashes backwards and
forwards through the covert, whining in its eagerness, until it comes
across the lost scent. For twenty minutes or more he continued his
researches, measuring with the most exact care the distance between
marks which were entirely invisible to me, and occasionally applying his
tape to the walls in an equally incomprehensible manner. In one place
he gathered up very carefully a little pile of grey dust from the floor,
and packed it away in an envelope. Finally, he examined with his glass
the word upon the wall, going over every letter of it with the most
minute exactness. This done, he appeared to be satisfied, for he
replaced his tape and his glass in his pocket.

They say that genius is an infinite capacity for taking pains, he
remarked with a smile. Its a very bad definition, but it does apply to
detective work.

Gregson and Lestrade had watched the manoeuvres [9] of their amateur
companion with considerable curiosity and some contempt. They evidently
failed to appreciate the fact, which I had begun to realize, that
Sherlock Holmes smallest actions were all directed towards some
definite and practical end.

What do you think of it, sir? they both asked.

It would be robbing you of the credit of the case if I was to presume
to help you, remarked my friend. You are doing so well now that it
would be a pity for anyone to interfere. There was a world of
sarcasm in his voice as he spoke. If you will let me know how your
investigations go, he continued, I shall be happy to give you any help
I can. In the meantime I should like to speak to the constable who found
the body. Can you give me his name and address?

Lestrade glanced at his note-book. John Rance, he said. He is off
duty now. You will find him at 46, Audley Court, Kennington Park Gate.

Holmes took a note of the address.

Come along, Doctor, he said; we shall go and look him up. Ill tell
you one thing which may help you in the case, he continued, turning to
the two detectives. There has been murder done, and the murderer was a
man. He was more than six feet high, was in the prime of life, had
small feet for his height, wore coarse, square-toed boots and smoked a
Trichinopoly cigar. He came here with his victim in a four-wheeled cab,
which was drawn by a horse with three old shoes and one new one on his
off fore leg. In all probability the murderer had a florid face, and the
finger-nails of his right hand were remarkably long. These are only a
few indications, but they may assist you.

Lestrade and Gregson glanced at each other with an incredulous smile.

If this man was murdered, how was it done? asked the former.

Poison, said Sherlock Holmes curtly, and strode off. One other thing,
Lestrade, he added, turning round at the door: Rache, is the German
for revenge; so dont lose your time looking for Miss Rachel.

With which Parthian shot he walked away, leaving the two rivals
open-mouthed behind him.




CHAPTER IV. WHAT JOHN RANCE HAD TO TELL.


IT was one oclock when we left No. 3, Lauriston Gardens. Sherlock
Holmes led me to the nearest telegraph office, whence he dispatched a
long telegram. He then hailed a cab, and ordered the driver to take us
to the address given us by Lestrade.

There is nothing like first hand evidence, he remarked; as a matter
of fact, my mind is entirely made up upon the case, but still we may as
well learn all that is to be learned.

You amaze me, Holmes, said I. Surely you are not as sure as you
pretend to be of all those particulars which you gave.

Theres no room for a mistake, he answered. The very first thing
which I observed on arriving there was that a cab had made two ruts with
its wheels close to the curb. Now, up to last night, we have had no rain
for a week, so that those wheels which left such a deep impression must
have been there during the night. There were the marks of the horses
hoofs, too, the outline of one of which was far more clearly cut than
that of the other three, showing that that was a new shoe. Since the cab
was there after the rain began, and was not there at any time during the
morning--I have Gregsons word for that--it follows that it must have
been there during the night, and, therefore, that it brought those two
individuals to the house.

That seems simple enough, said I; but how about the other mans
height?

Why, the height of a man, in nine cases out of ten, can be told from
the length of his stride. It is a simple calculation enough, though
there is no use my boring you with figures. I had this fellows stride
both on the clay outside and on the dust within. Then I had a way of
checking my calculation. When a man writes on a wall, his instinct leads
him to write about the level of his own eyes. Now that writing was just
over six feet from the ground. It was childs play.

And his age? I asked.

Well, if a man can stride four and a-half feet without the smallest
effort, he cant be quite in the sere and yellow. That was the breadth
of a puddle on the garden walk which he had evidently walked across.
Patent-leather boots had gone round, and Square-toes had hopped over.
There is no mystery about it at all. I am simply applying to ordinary
life a few of those precepts of observation and deduction which I
advocated in that article. Is there anything else that puzzles you?

The finger nails and the Trichinopoly, I suggested.

The writing on the wall was done with a mans forefinger dipped in
blood. My glass allowed me to observe that the plaster was slightly
scratched in doing it, which would not have been the case if the mans
nail had been trimmed. I gathered up some scattered ash from the floor.
It was dark in colour and flakey--such an ash as is only made by a
Trichinopoly. I have made a special study of cigar ashes--in fact, I
have written a monograph upon the subject. I flatter myself that I can
distinguish at a glance the ash of any known brand, either of cigar
or of tobacco. It is just in such details that the skilled detective
differs from the Gregson and Lestrade type.

And the florid face? I asked.

Ah, that was a more daring shot, though I have no doubt that I was
right. You must not ask me that at the present state of the affair.

I passed my hand over my brow. My head is in a whirl, I remarked; the
more one thinks of it the more mysterious it grows. How came these two
men--if there were two men--into an empty house? What has become of the
cabman who drove them? How could one man compel another to take poison?
Where did the blood come from? What was the object of the murderer,
since robbery had no part in it? How came the womans ring there? Above
all, why should the second man write up the German word RACHE before
decamping? I confess that I cannot see any possible way of reconciling
all these facts.

My companion smiled approvingly.

You sum up the difficulties of the situation succinctly and well, he
said. There is much that is still obscure, though I have quite made up
my mind on the main facts. As to poor Lestrades discovery it was simply
a blind intended to put the police upon a wrong track, by suggesting
Socialism and secret societies. It was not done by a German. The A, if
you noticed, was printed somewhat after the German fashion. Now, a real
German invariably prints in the Latin character, so that we may safely
say that this was not written by one, but by a clumsy imitator who
overdid his part. It was simply a ruse to divert inquiry into a wrong
channel. Im not going to tell you much more of the case, Doctor. You
know a conjuror gets no credit when once he has explained his trick,
and if I show you too much of my method of working, you will come to the
conclusion that I am a very ordinary individual after all.

I shall never do that, I answered; you have brought detection as near
an exact science as it ever will be brought in this world.

My companion flushed up with pleasure at my words, and the earnest way
in which I uttered them. I had already observed that he was as sensitive
to flattery on the score of his art as any girl could be of her beauty.

Ill tell you one other thing, he said. Patent leathers [10] and
Square-toes came in the same cab, and they walked down the pathway
together as friendly as possible--arm-in-arm, in all probability.
When they got inside they walked up and down the room--or rather,
Patent-leathers stood still while Square-toes walked up and down. I
could read all that in the dust; and I could read that as he walked he
grew more and more excited. That is shown by the increased length of his
strides. He was talking all the while, and working himself up, no doubt,
into a fury. Then the tragedy occurred. Ive told you all I know myself
now, for the rest is mere surmise and conjecture. We have a good working
basis, however, on which to start. We must hurry up, for I want to go to
Halles concert to hear Norman Neruda this afternoon.

This conversation had occurred while our cab had been threading its way
through a long succession of dingy streets and dreary by-ways. In the
dingiest and dreariest of them our driver suddenly came to a stand.
Thats Audley Court in there, he said, pointing to a narrow slit in
the line of dead-coloured brick. Youll find me here when you come
back.

Audley Court was not an attractive locality. The narrow passage led us
into a quadrangle paved with flags and lined by sordid dwellings. We
picked our way among groups of dirty children, and through lines of
discoloured linen, until we came to Number 46, the door of which
was decorated with a small slip of brass on which the name Rance was
engraved. On enquiry we found that the constable was in bed, and we were
shown into a little front parlour to await his coming.

He appeared presently, looking a little irritable at being disturbed in
his slumbers. I made my report at the office, he said.

Holmes took a half-sovereign from his pocket and played with it
pensively. We thought that we should like to hear it all from your own
lips, he said.

I shall be most happy to tell you anything I can, the constable
answered with his eyes upon the little golden disk.

Just let us hear it all in your own way as it occurred.

Rance sat down on the horsehair sofa, and knitted his brows as though
determined not to omit anything in his narrative.

Ill tell it ye from the beginning, he said. My time is from ten at
night to six in the morning. At eleven there was a fight at the White
Hart; but bar that all was quiet enough on the beat. At one oclock it
began to rain, and I met Harry Murcher--him who has the Holland Grove
beat--and we stood together at the corner of Henrietta Street a-talkin.
Presently--maybe about two or a little after--I thought I would take
a look round and see that all was right down the Brixton Road. It was
precious dirty and lonely. Not a soul did I meet all the way down,
though a cab or two went past me. I was a strollin down, thinkin
between ourselves how uncommon handy a four of gin hot would be, when
suddenly the glint of a light caught my eye in the window of that same
house. Now, I knew that them two houses in Lauriston Gardens was empty
on account of him that owns them who wont have the drains seen to,
though the very last tenant what lived in one of them died o typhoid
fever. I was knocked all in a heap therefore at seeing a light in
the window, and I suspected as something was wrong. When I got to the
door----

You stopped, and then walked back to the garden gate, my companion
interrupted. What did you do that for?

Rance gave a violent jump, and stared at Sherlock Holmes with the utmost
amazement upon his features.

Why, thats true, sir, he said; though how you come to know it,
Heaven only knows. Ye see, when I got up to the door it was so still and
so lonesome, that I thought Id be none the worse for some one with me.
I aint afeared of anything on this side o the grave; but I thought
that maybe it was him that died o the typhoid inspecting the drains
what killed him. The thought gave me a kind o turn, and I walked back
to the gate to see if I could see Murchers lantern, but there wasnt no
sign of him nor of anyone else.

There was no one in the street?

Not a livin soul, sir, nor as much as a dog. Then I pulled myself
together and went back and pushed the door open. All was quiet inside,
so I went into the room where the light was a-burnin. There was a
candle flickerin on the mantelpiece--a red wax one--and by its light I
saw----

Yes, I know all that you saw. You walked round the room several times,
and you knelt down by the body, and then you walked through and tried
the kitchen door, and then----

John Rance sprang to his feet with a frightened face and suspicion in
his eyes. Where was you hid to see all that? he cried. It seems to me
that you knows a deal more than you should.

Holmes laughed and threw his card across the table to the constable.
Dont get arresting me for the murder, he said. I am one of the
hounds and not the wolf; Mr. Gregson or Mr. Lestrade will answer for
that. Go on, though. What did you do next?

Rance resumed his seat, without however losing his mystified expression.
I went back to the gate and sounded my whistle. That brought Murcher
and two more to the spot.

Was the street empty then?

Well, it was, as far as anybody that could be of any good goes.

What do you mean?

The constables features broadened into a grin. Ive seen many a drunk
chap in my time, he said, but never anyone so cryin drunk as
that cove. He was at the gate when I came out, a-leanin up agin the
railings, and a-singin at the pitch o his lungs about Columbines
New-fangled Banner, or some such stuff. He couldnt stand, far less
help.

What sort of a man was he? asked Sherlock Holmes.

John Rance appeared to be somewhat irritated at this digression. He was
an uncommon drunk sort o man, he said. Hed ha found hisself in the
station if we hadnt been so took up.

His face--his dress--didnt you notice them? Holmes broke in
impatiently.

I should think I did notice them, seeing that I had to prop him up--me
and Murcher between us. He was a long chap, with a red face, the lower
part muffled round----

That will do, cried Holmes. What became of him?

Wed enough to do without lookin after him, the policeman said, in an
aggrieved voice. Ill wager he found his way home all right.

How was he dressed?

A brown overcoat.

Had he a whip in his hand?

A whip--no.

He must have left it behind, muttered my companion. You didnt happen
to see or hear a cab after that?

No.

Theres a half-sovereign for you, my companion said, standing up and
taking his hat. I am afraid, Rance, that you will never rise in the
force. That head of yours should be for use as well as ornament. You
might have gained your sergeants stripes last night. The man whom you
held in your hands is the man who holds the clue of this mystery, and
whom we are seeking. There is no use of arguing about it now; I tell you
that it is so. Come along, Doctor.

We started off for the cab together, leaving our informant incredulous,
but obviously uncomfortable.

The blundering fool, Holmes said, bitterly, as we drove back to our
lodgings. Just to think of his having such an incomparable bit of good
luck, and not taking advantage of it.

I am rather in the dark still. It is true that the description of this
man tallies with your idea of the second party in this mystery. But why
should he come back to the house after leaving it? That is not the way
of criminals.

The ring, man, the ring: that was what he came back for. If we have no
other way of catching him, we can always bait our line with the ring. I
shall have him, Doctor--Ill lay you two to one that I have him. I must
thank you for it all. I might not have gone but for you, and so have
missed the finest study I ever came across: a study in scarlet, eh?
Why shouldnt we use a little art jargon. Theres the scarlet thread of
murder running through the colourless skein of life, and our duty is
to unravel it, and isolate it, and expose every inch of it. And now
for lunch, and then for Norman Neruda. Her attack and her bowing
are splendid. Whats that little thing of Chopins she plays so
magnificently: Tra-la-la-lira-lira-lay.

Leaning back in the cab, this amateur bloodhound carolled away like a
lark while I meditated upon the many-sidedness of the human mind.




CHAPTER V. OUR ADVERTISEMENT BRINGS A VISITOR.


OUR mornings exertions had been too much for my weak health, and I was
tired out in the afternoon. After Holmes departure for the concert, I
lay down upon the sofa and endeavoured to get a couple of hours sleep.
It was a useless attempt. My mind had been too much excited by all that
had occurred, and the strangest fancies and surmises crowded into
it. Every time that I closed my eyes I saw before me the distorted
baboon-like countenance of the murdered man. So sinister was the
impression which that face had produced upon me that I found it
difficult to feel anything but gratitude for him who had removed its
owner from the world. If ever human features bespoke vice of the most
malignant type, they were certainly those of Enoch J. Drebber, of
Cleveland. Still I recognized that justice must be done, and that the
depravity of the victim was no condonment [11] in the eyes of the law.

The more I thought of it the more extraordinary did my companions
hypothesis, that the man had been poisoned, appear. I remembered how he
had sniffed his lips, and had no doubt that he had detected something
which had given rise to the idea. Then, again, if not poison, what
had caused the mans death, since there was neither wound nor marks of
strangulation? But, on the other hand, whose blood was that which lay so
thickly upon the floor? There were no signs of a struggle, nor had the
victim any weapon with which he might have wounded an antagonist. As
long as all these questions were unsolved, I felt that sleep would be
no easy matter, either for Holmes or myself. His quiet self-confident
manner convinced me that he had already formed a theory which explained
all the facts, though what it was I could not for an instant conjecture.

He was very late in returning--so late, that I knew that the concert
could not have detained him all the time. Dinner was on the table before
he appeared.

It was magnificent, he said, as he took his seat. Do you remember
what Darwin says about music? He claims that the power of producing and
appreciating it existed among the human race long before the power of
speech was arrived at. Perhaps that is why we are so subtly influenced
by it. There are vague memories in our souls of those misty centuries
when the world was in its childhood.

Thats rather a broad idea, I remarked.

Ones ideas must be as broad as Nature if they are to interpret
Nature, he answered. Whats the matter? Youre not looking quite
yourself. This Brixton Road affair has upset you.

To tell the truth, it has, I said. I ought to be more case-hardened
after my Afghan experiences. I saw my own comrades hacked to pieces at
Maiwand without losing my nerve.

I can understand. There is a mystery about this which stimulates the
imagination; where there is no imagination there is no horror. Have you
seen the evening paper?

No.

It gives a fairly good account of the affair. It does not mention the
fact that when the man was raised up, a womans wedding ring fell upon
the floor. It is just as well it does not.

Why?

Look at this advertisement, he answered. I had one sent to every
paper this morning immediately after the affair.

He threw the paper across to me and I glanced at the place indicated. It
was the first announcement in the Found column. In Brixton Road,
this morning, it ran, a plain gold wedding ring, found in the roadway
between the White Hart Tavern and Holland Grove. Apply Dr. Watson,
221B, Baker Street, between eight and nine this evening.

Excuse my using your name, he said. If I used my own some of these
dunderheads would recognize it, and want to meddle in the affair.

That is all right, I answered. But supposing anyone applies, I have
no ring.

Oh yes, you have, said he, handing me one. This will do very well. It
is almost a facsimile.

And who do you expect will answer this advertisement.

Why, the man in the brown coat--our florid friend with the square toes.
If he does not come himself he will send an accomplice.

Would he not consider it as too dangerous?

Not at all. If my view of the case is correct, and I have every reason
to believe that it is, this man would rather risk anything than lose the
ring. According to my notion he dropped it while stooping over Drebbers
body, and did not miss it at the time. After leaving the house he
discovered his loss and hurried back, but found the police already in
possession, owing to his own folly in leaving the candle burning. He had
to pretend to be drunk in order to allay the suspicions which might have
been aroused by his appearance at the gate. Now put yourself in that
mans place. On thinking the matter over, it must have occurred to him
that it was possible that he had lost the ring in the road after leaving
the house. What would he do, then? He would eagerly look out for the
evening papers in the hope of seeing it among the articles found. His
eye, of course, would light upon this. He would be overjoyed. Why should
he fear a trap? There would be no reason in his eyes why the finding
of the ring should be connected with the murder. He would come. He will
come. You shall see him within an hour?

And then? I asked.

Oh, you can leave me to deal with him then. Have you any arms?

I have my old service revolver and a few cartridges.

You had better clean it and load it. He will be a desperate man,
and though I shall take him unawares, it is as well to be ready for
anything.

I went to my bedroom and followed his advice. When I returned with
the pistol the table had been cleared, and Holmes was engaged in his
favourite occupation of scraping upon his violin.

The plot thickens, he said, as I entered; I have just had an answer
to my American telegram. My view of the case is the correct one.

And that is? I asked eagerly.

My fiddle would be the better for new strings, he remarked. Put your
pistol in your pocket. When the fellow comes speak to him in an ordinary
way. Leave the rest to me. Dont frighten him by looking at him too
hard.

It is eight oclock now, I said, glancing at my watch.

Yes. He will probably be here in a few minutes. Open the door slightly.
That will do. Now put the key on the inside. Thank you! This is a
queer old book I picked up at a stall yesterday--De Jure inter
Gentes--published in Latin at Liege in the Lowlands, in 1642. Charles
head was still firm on his shoulders when this little brown-backed
volume was struck off.

Who is the printer?

Philippe de Croy, whoever he may have been. On the fly-leaf, in very
faded ink, is written Ex libris Guliolmi Whyte. I wonder who William
Whyte was. Some pragmatical seventeenth century lawyer, I suppose. His
writing has a legal twist about it. Here comes our man, I think.

As he spoke there was a sharp ring at the bell. Sherlock Holmes rose
softly and moved his chair in the direction of the door. We heard the
servant pass along the hall, and the sharp click of the latch as she
opened it.

Does Dr. Watson live here? asked a clear but rather harsh voice. We
could not hear the servants reply, but the door closed, and some one
began to ascend the stairs. The footfall was an uncertain and shuffling
one. A look of surprise passed over the face of my companion as he
listened to it. It came slowly along the passage, and there was a feeble
tap at the door.

Come in, I cried.

At my summons, instead of the man of violence whom we expected, a very
old and wrinkled woman hobbled into the apartment. She appeared to be
dazzled by the sudden blaze of light, and after dropping a curtsey, she
stood blinking at us with her bleared eyes and fumbling in her pocket
with nervous, shaky fingers. I glanced at my companion, and his face
had assumed such a disconsolate expression that it was all I could do to
keep my countenance.

The old crone drew out an evening paper, and pointed at our
advertisement. Its this as has brought me, good gentlemen, she said,
dropping another curtsey; a gold wedding ring in the Brixton Road. It
belongs to my girl Sally, as was married only this time twelvemonth,
which her husband is steward aboard a Union boat, and what hed say if
he come ome and found her without her ring is more than I can think, he
being short enough at the best o times, but more especially when he
has the drink. If it please you, she went to the circus last night along
with----

Is that her ring? I asked.

The Lord be thanked! cried the old woman; Sally will be a glad woman
this night. Thats the ring.

And what may your address be? I inquired, taking up a pencil.

13, Duncan Street, Houndsditch. A weary way from here.

The Brixton Road does not lie between any circus and Houndsditch, said
Sherlock Holmes sharply.

The old woman faced round and looked keenly at him from her little
red-rimmed eyes. The gentleman asked me for _my_ address, she said.
Sally lives in lodgings at 3, Mayfield Place, Peckham.

And your name is----?

My name is Sawyer--hers is Dennis, which Tom Dennis married her--and
a smart, clean lad, too, as long as hes at sea, and no steward in the
company more thought of; but when on shore, what with the women and what
with liquor shops----

Here is your ring, Mrs. Sawyer, I interrupted, in obedience to a sign
from my companion; it clearly belongs to your daughter, and I am glad
to be able to restore it to the rightful owner.

With many mumbled blessings and protestations of gratitude the old crone
packed it away in her pocket, and shuffled off down the stairs. Sherlock
Holmes sprang to his feet the moment that she was gone and rushed into
his room. He returned in a few seconds enveloped in an ulster and
a cravat. Ill follow her, he said, hurriedly; she must be an
accomplice, and will lead me to him. Wait up for me. The hall door had
hardly slammed behind our visitor before Holmes had descended the stair.
Looking through the window I could see her walking feebly along the
other side, while her pursuer dogged her some little distance behind.
Either his whole theory is incorrect, I thought to myself, or else he
will be led now to the heart of the mystery. There was no need for him
to ask me to wait up for him, for I felt that sleep was impossible until
I heard the result of his adventure.

It was close upon nine when he set out. I had no idea how long he might
be, but I sat stolidly puffing at my pipe and skipping over the pages
of Henri Murgers Vie de Bohme. Ten oclock passed, and I heard the
footsteps of the maid as they pattered off to bed. Eleven, and the
more stately tread of the landlady passed my door, bound for the same
destination. It was close upon twelve before I heard the sharp sound of
his latch-key. The instant he entered I saw by his face that he had not
been successful. Amusement and chagrin seemed to be struggling for the
mastery, until the former suddenly carried the day, and he burst into a
hearty laugh.

I wouldnt have the Scotland Yarders know it for the world, he cried,
dropping into his chair; I have chaffed them so much that they would
never have let me hear the end of it. I can afford to laugh, because I
know that I will be even with them in the long run.

What is it then? I asked.

Oh, I dont mind telling a story against myself. That creature had
gone a little way when she began to limp and show every sign of being
foot-sore. Presently she came to a halt, and hailed a four-wheeler which
was passing. I managed to be close to her so as to hear the address, but
I need not have been so anxious, for she sang it out loud enough to
be heard at the other side of the street, Drive to 13, Duncan Street,
Houndsditch, she cried. This begins to look genuine, I thought, and
having seen her safely inside, I perched myself behind. Thats an art
which every detective should be an expert at. Well, away we rattled, and
never drew rein until we reached the street in question. I hopped off
before we came to the door, and strolled down the street in an easy,
lounging way. I saw the cab pull up. The driver jumped down, and I saw
him open the door and stand expectantly. Nothing came out though. When
I reached him he was groping about frantically in the empty cab, and
giving vent to the finest assorted collection of oaths that ever I
listened to. There was no sign or trace of his passenger, and I fear it
will be some time before he gets his fare. On inquiring at Number 13
we found that the house belonged to a respectable paperhanger, named
Keswick, and that no one of the name either of Sawyer or Dennis had ever
been heard of there.

You dont mean to say, I cried, in amazement, that that tottering,
feeble old woman was able to get out of the cab while it was in motion,
without either you or the driver seeing her?

Old woman be damned! said Sherlock Holmes, sharply. We were the old
women to be so taken in. It must have been a young man, and an
active one, too, besides being an incomparable actor. The get-up was
inimitable. He saw that he was followed, no doubt, and used this means
of giving me the slip. It shows that the man we are after is not as
lonely as I imagined he was, but has friends who are ready to risk
something for him. Now, Doctor, you are looking done-up. Take my advice
and turn in.

I was certainly feeling very weary, so I obeyed his injunction. I
left Holmes seated in front of the smouldering fire, and long into the
watches of the night I heard the low, melancholy wailings of his violin,
and knew that he was still pondering over the strange problem which he
had set himself to unravel.




CHAPTER VI. TOBIAS GREGSON SHOWS WHAT HE CAN DO.


THE papers next day were full of the Brixton Mystery, as they termed
it. Each had a long account of the affair, and some had leaders upon it
in addition. There was some information in them which was new to me. I
still retain in my scrap-book numerous clippings and extracts bearing
upon the case. Here is a condensation of a few of them:--

The _Daily Telegraph_ remarked that in the history of crime there had
seldom been a tragedy which presented stranger features. The German
name of the victim, the absence of all other motive, and the sinister
inscription on the wall, all pointed to its perpetration by political
refugees and revolutionists. The Socialists had many branches in
America, and the deceased had, no doubt, infringed their unwritten laws,
and been tracked down by them. After alluding airily to the Vehmgericht,
aqua tofana, Carbonari, the Marchioness de Brinvilliers, the Darwinian
theory, the principles of Malthus, and the Ratcliff Highway murders, the
article concluded by admonishing the Government and advocating a closer
watch over foreigners in England.

The _Standard_ commented upon the fact that lawless outrages of the sort
usually occurred under a Liberal Administration. They arose from the
unsettling of the minds of the masses, and the consequent weakening
of all authority. The deceased was an American gentleman who had
been residing for some weeks in the Metropolis. He had stayed at the
boarding-house of Madame Charpentier, in Torquay Terrace, Camberwell.
He was accompanied in his travels by his private secretary, Mr. Joseph
Stangerson. The two bade adieu to their landlady upon Tuesday, the
4th inst., and departed to Euston Station with the avowed intention of
catching the Liverpool express. They were afterwards seen together upon
the platform. Nothing more is known of them until Mr. Drebbers body
was, as recorded, discovered in an empty house in the Brixton Road,
many miles from Euston. How he came there, or how he met his fate, are
questions which are still involved in mystery. Nothing is known of the
whereabouts of Stangerson. We are glad to learn that Mr. Lestrade and
Mr. Gregson, of Scotland Yard, are both engaged upon the case, and it
is confidently anticipated that these well-known officers will speedily
throw light upon the matter.

The _Daily News_ observed that there was no doubt as to the crime being
a political one. The despotism and hatred of Liberalism which animated
the Continental Governments had had the effect of driving to our shores
a number of men who might have made excellent citizens were they not
soured by the recollection of all that they had undergone. Among these
men there was a stringent code of honour, any infringement of which was
punished by death. Every effort should be made to find the secretary,
Stangerson, and to ascertain some particulars of the habits of the
deceased. A great step had been gained by the discovery of the address
of the house at which he had boarded--a result which was entirely due to
the acuteness and energy of Mr. Gregson of Scotland Yard.

Sherlock Holmes and I read these notices over together at breakfast, and
they appeared to afford him considerable amusement.

I told you that, whatever happened, Lestrade and Gregson would be sure
to score.

That depends on how it turns out.

Oh, bless you, it doesnt matter in the least. If the man is caught, it
will be _on account_ of their exertions; if he escapes, it will be _in
spite_ of their exertions. Its heads I win and tails you lose. Whatever
they do, they will have followers. Un sot trouve toujours un plus sot
qui ladmire.

What on earth is this? I cried, for at this moment there came the
pattering of many steps in the hall and on the stairs, accompanied by
audible expressions of disgust upon the part of our landlady.

Its the Baker Street division of the detective police force, said my
companion, gravely; and as he spoke there rushed into the room half a
dozen of the dirtiest and most ragged street Arabs that ever I clapped
eyes on.

Tention! cried Holmes, in a sharp tone, and the six dirty little
scoundrels stood in a line like so many disreputable statuettes. In
future you shall send up Wiggins alone to report, and the rest of you
must wait in the street. Have you found it, Wiggins?

No, sir, we haint, said one of the youths.

I hardly expected you would. You must keep on until you do. Here are
your wages. [13] He handed each of them a shilling.

Now, off you go, and come back with a better report next time.

He waved his hand, and they scampered away downstairs like so many rats,
and we heard their shrill voices next moment in the street.

Theres more work to be got out of one of those little beggars than
out of a dozen of the force, Holmes remarked. The mere sight of an
official-looking person seals mens lips. These youngsters, however, go
everywhere and hear everything. They are as sharp as needles, too; all
they want is organisation.

Is it on this Brixton case that you are employing them? I asked.

Yes; there is a point which I wish to ascertain. It is merely a matter
of time. Hullo! we are going to hear some news now with a vengeance!
Here is Gregson coming down the road with beatitude written upon every
feature of his face. Bound for us, I know. Yes, he is stopping. There he
is!

There was a violent peal at the bell, and in a few seconds the
fair-haired detective came up the stairs, three steps at a time, and
burst into our sitting-room.

My dear fellow, he cried, wringing Holmes unresponsive hand,
congratulate me! I have made the whole thing as clear as day.

A shade of anxiety seemed to me to cross my companions expressive face.

Do you mean that you are on the right track? he asked.

The right track! Why, sir, we have the man under lock and key.

And his name is?

Arthur Charpentier, sub-lieutenant in Her Majestys navy, cried
Gregson, pompously, rubbing his fat hands and inflating his chest.

Sherlock Holmes gave a sigh of relief, and relaxed into a smile.

Take a seat, and try one of these cigars, he said. We are anxious to
know how you managed it. Will you have some whiskey and water?

I dont mind if I do, the detective answered. The tremendous
exertions which I have gone through during the last day or two have worn
me out. Not so much bodily exertion, you understand, as the strain upon
the mind. You will appreciate that, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, for we are both
brain-workers.

You do me too much honour, said Holmes, gravely. Let us hear how you
arrived at this most gratifying result.

The detective seated himself in the arm-chair, and puffed complacently
at his cigar. Then suddenly he slapped his thigh in a paroxysm of
amusement.

The fun of it is, he cried, that that fool Lestrade, who thinks
himself so smart, has gone off upon the wrong track altogether. He is
after the secretary Stangerson, who had no more to do with the crime
than the babe unborn. I have no doubt that he has caught him by this
time.

The idea tickled Gregson so much that he laughed until he choked.

And how did you get your clue?

Ah, Ill tell you all about it. Of course, Doctor Watson, this is
strictly between ourselves. The first difficulty which we had to contend
with was the finding of this Americans antecedents. Some people would
have waited until their advertisements were answered, or until parties
came forward and volunteered information. That is not Tobias Gregsons
way of going to work. You remember the hat beside the dead man?

Yes, said Holmes; by John Underwood and Sons, 129, Camberwell Road.

Gregson looked quite crest-fallen.

I had no idea that you noticed that, he said. Have you been there?

No.

Ha! cried Gregson, in a relieved voice; you should never neglect a
chance, however small it may seem.

To a great mind, nothing is little, remarked Holmes, sententiously.

Well, I went to Underwood, and asked him if he had sold a hat of that
size and description. He looked over his books, and came on it at once.
He had sent the hat to a Mr. Drebber, residing at Charpentiers Boarding
Establishment, Torquay Terrace. Thus I got at his address.

Smart--very smart! murmured Sherlock Holmes.

I next called upon Madame Charpentier, continued the detective.
I found her very pale and distressed. Her daughter was in the room,
too--an uncommonly fine girl she is, too; she was looking red about
the eyes and her lips trembled as I spoke to her. That didnt escape
my notice. I began to smell a rat. You know the feeling, Mr. Sherlock
Holmes, when you come upon the right scent--a kind of thrill in your
nerves. Have you heard of the mysterious death of your late boarder Mr.
Enoch J. Drebber, of Cleveland? I asked.

The mother nodded. She didnt seem able to get out a word. The daughter
burst into tears. I felt more than ever that these people knew something
of the matter.

At what oclock did Mr. Drebber leave your house for the train? I
asked.

At eight oclock, she said, gulping in her throat to keep down her
agitation. His secretary, Mr. Stangerson, said that there were two
trains--one at 9.15 and one at 11. He was to catch the first. [14]

And was that the last which you saw of him?

A terrible change came over the womans face as I asked the question.
Her features turned perfectly livid. It was some seconds before she
could get out the single word Yes--and when it did come it was in a
husky unnatural tone.

There was silence for a moment, and then the daughter spoke in a calm
clear voice.

No good can ever come of falsehood, mother, she said. Let us be
frank with this gentleman. We _did_ see Mr. Drebber again.

God forgive you! cried Madame Charpentier, throwing up her hands and
sinking back in her chair. You have murdered your brother.

Arthur would rather that we spoke the truth, the girl answered
firmly.

You had best tell me all about it now, I said. Half-confidences are
worse than none. Besides, you do not know how much we know of it.

On your head be it, Alice! cried her mother; and then, turning to me,
I will tell you all, sir. Do not imagine that my agitation on behalf
of my son arises from any fear lest he should have had a hand in this
terrible affair. He is utterly innocent of it. My dread is, however,
that in your eyes and in the eyes of others he may appear to be
compromised. That however is surely impossible. His high character, his
profession, his antecedents would all forbid it.

Your best way is to make a clean breast of the facts, I answered.
Depend upon it, if your son is innocent he will be none the worse.

Perhaps, Alice, you had better leave us together, she said, and her
daughter withdrew. Now, sir, she continued, I had no intention of
telling you all this, but since my poor daughter has disclosed it I
have no alternative. Having once decided to speak, I will tell you all
without omitting any particular.

It is your wisest course, said I.

Mr. Drebber has been with us nearly three weeks. He and his secretary,
Mr. Stangerson, had been travelling on the Continent. I noticed a
Copenhagen label upon each of their trunks, showing that that had been
their last stopping place. Stangerson was a quiet reserved man, but his
employer, I am sorry to say, was far otherwise. He was coarse in his
habits and brutish in his ways. The very night of his arrival he became
very much the worse for drink, and, indeed, after twelve oclock in the
day he could hardly ever be said to be sober. His manners towards the
maid-servants were disgustingly free and familiar. Worst of all, he
speedily assumed the same attitude towards my daughter, Alice, and spoke
to her more than once in a way which, fortunately, she is too innocent
to understand. On one occasion he actually seized her in his arms and
embraced her--an outrage which caused his own secretary to reproach him
for his unmanly conduct.

But why did you stand all this, I asked. I suppose that you can get
rid of your boarders when you wish.

Mrs. Charpentier blushed at my pertinent question. Would to God that
I had given him notice on the very day that he came, she said. But
it was a sore temptation. They were paying a pound a day each--fourteen
pounds a week, and this is the slack season. I am a widow, and my boy in
the Navy has cost me much. I grudged to lose the money. I acted for the
best. This last was too much, however, and I gave him notice to leave on
account of it. That was the reason of his going.

Well?

My heart grew light when I saw him drive away. My son is on leave
just now, but I did not tell him anything of all this, for his temper
is violent, and he is passionately fond of his sister. When I closed the
door behind them a load seemed to be lifted from my mind. Alas, in
less than an hour there was a ring at the bell, and I learned that Mr.
Drebber had returned. He was much excited, and evidently the worse for
drink. He forced his way into the room, where I was sitting with my
daughter, and made some incoherent remark about having missed his train.
He then turned to Alice, and before my very face, proposed to her that
she should fly with him. You are of age, he said, and there is no law
to stop you. I have money enough and to spare. Never mind the old girl
here, but come along with me now straight away. You shall live like a
princess. Poor Alice was so frightened that she shrunk away from him,
but he caught her by the wrist and endeavoured to draw her towards the
door. I screamed, and at that moment my son Arthur came into the room.
What happened then I do not know. I heard oaths and the confused sounds
of a scuffle. I was too terrified to raise my head. When I did look up
I saw Arthur standing in the doorway laughing, with a stick in his hand.
I dont think that fine fellow will trouble us again, he said. I will
just go after him and see what he does with himself. With those words
he took his hat and started off down the street. The next morning we
heard of Mr. Drebbers mysterious death.

This statement came from Mrs. Charpentiers lips with many gasps and
pauses. At times she spoke so low that I could hardly catch the words. I
made shorthand notes of all that she said, however, so that there should
be no possibility of a mistake.

Its quite exciting, said Sherlock Holmes, with a yawn. What happened
next?

When Mrs. Charpentier paused, the detective continued, I saw that the
whole case hung upon one point. Fixing her with my eye in a way which
I always found effective with women, I asked her at what hour her son
returned.

I do not know, she answered.

Not know?

No; he has a latch-key, and he let himself in.

After you went to bed?

Yes.

When did you go to bed?

About eleven.

So your son was gone at least two hours?

Yes.

Possibly four or five?

Yes.

What was he doing during that time?

I do not know, she answered, turning white to her very lips.

Of course after that there was nothing more to be done. I found
out where Lieutenant Charpentier was, took two officers with me, and
arrested him. When I touched him on the shoulder and warned him to come
quietly with us, he answered us as bold as brass, I suppose you
are arresting me for being concerned in the death of that scoundrel
Drebber, he said. We had said nothing to him about it, so that his
alluding to it had a most suspicious aspect.

Very, said Holmes.

He still carried the heavy stick which the mother described him as
having with him when he followed Drebber. It was a stout oak cudgel.

What is your theory, then?

Well, my theory is that he followed Drebber as far as the Brixton Road.
When there, a fresh altercation arose between them, in the course of
which Drebber received a blow from the stick, in the pit of the stomach,
perhaps, which killed him without leaving any mark. The night was so
wet that no one was about, so Charpentier dragged the body of his victim
into the empty house. As to the candle, and the blood, and the writing
on the wall, and the ring, they may all be so many tricks to throw the
police on to the wrong scent.

Well done! said Holmes in an encouraging voice. Really, Gregson, you
are getting along. We shall make something of you yet.

I flatter myself that I have managed it rather neatly, the detective
answered proudly. The young man volunteered a statement, in which he
said that after following Drebber some time, the latter perceived him,
and took a cab in order to get away from him. On his way home he met an
old shipmate, and took a long walk with him. On being asked where this
old shipmate lived, he was unable to give any satisfactory reply. I
think the whole case fits together uncommonly well. What amuses me is to
think of Lestrade, who had started off upon the wrong scent. I am afraid
he wont make much of [15] Why, by Jove, heres the very man himself!

It was indeed Lestrade, who had ascended the stairs while we were
talking, and who now entered the room. The assurance and jauntiness
which generally marked his demeanour and dress were, however, wanting.
His face was disturbed and troubled, while his clothes were disarranged
and untidy. He had evidently come with the intention of consulting
with Sherlock Holmes, for on perceiving his colleague he appeared to be
embarrassed and put out. He stood in the centre of the room, fumbling
nervously with his hat and uncertain what to do. This is a most
extraordinary case, he said at last--a most incomprehensible affair.

Ah, you find it so, Mr. Lestrade! cried Gregson, triumphantly. I
thought you would come to that conclusion. Have you managed to find the
Secretary, Mr. Joseph Stangerson?

The Secretary, Mr. Joseph Stangerson, said Lestrade gravely, was
murdered at Hallidays Private Hotel about six oclock this morning.




CHAPTER VII. LIGHT IN THE DARKNESS.


THE intelligence with which Lestrade greeted us was so momentous and so
unexpected, that we were all three fairly dumfoundered. Gregson sprang
out of his chair and upset the remainder of his whiskey and water. I
stared in silence at Sherlock Holmes, whose lips were compressed and his
brows drawn down over his eyes.

Stangerson too! he muttered. The plot thickens.

It was quite thick enough before, grumbled Lestrade, taking a chair.
I seem to have dropped into a sort of council of war.

Are you--are you sure of this piece of intelligence? stammered
Gregson.

I have just come from his room, said Lestrade. I was the first to
discover what had occurred.

We have been hearing Gregsons view of the matter, Holmes observed.
Would you mind letting us know what you have seen and done?

I have no objection, Lestrade answered, seating himself. I freely
confess that I was of the opinion that Stangerson was concerned in
the death of Drebber. This fresh development has shown me that I was
completely mistaken. Full of the one idea, I set myself to find out
what had become of the Secretary. They had been seen together at Euston
Station about half-past eight on the evening of the third. At two in the
morning Drebber had been found in the Brixton Road. The question which
confronted me was to find out how Stangerson had been employed between
8.30 and the time of the crime, and what had become of him afterwards.
I telegraphed to Liverpool, giving a description of the man, and warning
them to keep a watch upon the American boats. I then set to work calling
upon all the hotels and lodging-houses in the vicinity of Euston. You
see, I argued that if Drebber and his companion had become separated,
the natural course for the latter would be to put up somewhere in the
vicinity for the night, and then to hang about the station again next
morning.

They would be likely to agree on some meeting-place beforehand,
 remarked Holmes.

So it proved. I spent the whole of yesterday evening in making
enquiries entirely without avail. This morning I began very early, and
at eight oclock I reached Hallidays Private Hotel, in Little George
Street. On my enquiry as to whether a Mr. Stangerson was living there,
they at once answered me in the affirmative.

No doubt you are the gentleman whom he was expecting, they said. He
has been waiting for a gentleman for two days.

Where is he now? I asked.

He is upstairs in bed. He wished to be called at nine.

I will go up and see him at once, I said.

It seemed to me that my sudden appearance might shake his nerves and
lead him to say something unguarded. The Boots volunteered to show me
the room: it was on the second floor, and there was a small corridor
leading up to it. The Boots pointed out the door to me, and was about to
go downstairs again when I saw something that made me feel sickish, in
spite of my twenty years experience. From under the door there curled
a little red ribbon of blood, which had meandered across the passage and
formed a little pool along the skirting at the other side. I gave a cry,
which brought the Boots back. He nearly fainted when he saw it. The door
was locked on the inside, but we put our shoulders to it, and knocked it
in. The window of the room was open, and beside the window, all huddled
up, lay the body of a man in his nightdress. He was quite dead, and had
been for some time, for his limbs were rigid and cold. When we turned
him over, the Boots recognized him at once as being the same gentleman
who had engaged the room under the name of Joseph Stangerson. The cause
of death was a deep stab in the left side, which must have penetrated
the heart. And now comes the strangest part of the affair. What do you
suppose was above the murdered man?

I felt a creeping of the flesh, and a presentiment of coming horror,
even before Sherlock Holmes answered.

The word RACHE, written in letters of blood, he said.

That was it, said Lestrade, in an awe-struck voice; and we were all
silent for a while.

There was something so methodical and so incomprehensible about the
deeds of this unknown assassin, that it imparted a fresh ghastliness to
his crimes. My nerves, which were steady enough on the field of battle
tingled as I thought of it.

The man was seen, continued Lestrade. A milk boy, passing on his way
to the dairy, happened to walk down the lane which leads from the mews
at the back of the hotel. He noticed that a ladder, which usually lay
there, was raised against one of the windows of the second floor, which
was wide open. After passing, he looked back and saw a man descend the
ladder. He came down so quietly and openly that the boy imagined him to
be some carpenter or joiner at work in the hotel. He took no particular
notice of him, beyond thinking in his own mind that it was early for him
to be at work. He has an impression that the man was tall, had a reddish
face, and was dressed in a long, brownish coat. He must have stayed in
the room some little time after the murder, for we found blood-stained
water in the basin, where he had washed his hands, and marks on the
sheets where he had deliberately wiped his knife.

I glanced at Holmes on hearing the description of the murderer, which
tallied so exactly with his own. There was, however, no trace of
exultation or satisfaction upon his face.

Did you find nothing in the room which could furnish a clue to the
murderer? he asked.

Nothing. Stangerson had Drebbers purse in his pocket, but it seems
that this was usual, as he did all the paying. There was eighty odd
pounds in it, but nothing had been taken. Whatever the motives of these
extraordinary crimes, robbery is certainly not one of them. There were
no papers or memoranda in the murdered mans pocket, except a single
telegram, dated from Cleveland about a month ago, and containing
the words, J. H. is in Europe. There was no name appended to this
message.

And there was nothing else? Holmes asked.

Nothing of any importance. The mans novel, with which he had read
himself to sleep was lying upon the bed, and his pipe was on a chair
beside him. There was a glass of water on the table, and on the
window-sill a small chip ointment box containing a couple of pills.

Sherlock Holmes sprang from his chair with an exclamation of delight.

The last link, he cried, exultantly. My case is complete.

The two detectives stared at him in amazement.

I have now in my hands, my companion said, confidently, all the
threads which have formed such a tangle. There are, of course, details
to be filled in, but I am as certain of all the main facts, from the
time that Drebber parted from Stangerson at the station, up to the
discovery of the body of the latter, as if I had seen them with my own
eyes. I will give you a proof of my knowledge. Could you lay your hand
upon those pills?

I have them, said Lestrade, producing a small white box; I took them
and the purse and the telegram, intending to have them put in a place of
safety at the Police Station. It was the merest chance my taking these
pills, for I am bound to say that I do not attach any importance to
them.

Give them here, said Holmes. Now, Doctor, turning to me, are those
ordinary pills?

They certainly were not. They were of a pearly grey colour, small,
round, and almost transparent against the light. From their lightness
and transparency, I should imagine that they are soluble in water, I
remarked.

Precisely so, answered Holmes. Now would you mind going down and
fetching that poor little devil of a terrier which has been bad so long,
and which the landlady wanted you to put out of its pain yesterday.

I went downstairs and carried the dog upstair in my arms. Its laboured
breathing and glazing eye showed that it was not far from its end.
Indeed, its snow-white muzzle proclaimed that it had already exceeded
the usual term of canine existence. I placed it upon a cushion on the
rug.

I will now cut one of these pills in two, said Holmes, and drawing his
penknife he suited the action to the word. One half we return into the
box for future purposes. The other half I will place in this wine glass,
in which is a teaspoonful of water. You perceive that our friend, the
Doctor, is right, and that it readily dissolves.

This may be very interesting, said Lestrade, in the injured tone of
one who suspects that he is being laughed at, I cannot see, however,
what it has to do with the death of Mr. Joseph Stangerson.

Patience, my friend, patience! You will find in time that it has
everything to do with it. I shall now add a little milk to make the
mixture palatable, and on presenting it to the dog we find that he laps
it up readily enough.

As he spoke he turned the contents of the wine glass into a saucer and
placed it in front of the terrier, who speedily licked it dry. Sherlock
Holmes earnest demeanour had so far convinced us that we all sat in
silence, watching the animal intently, and expecting some startling
effect. None such appeared, however. The dog continued to lie stretched
upon tho [16] cushion, breathing in a laboured way, but apparently
neither the better nor the worse for its draught.

Holmes had taken out his watch, and as minute followed minute without
result, an expression of the utmost chagrin and disappointment appeared
upon his features. He gnawed his lip, drummed his fingers upon the
table, and showed every other symptom of acute impatience. So great
was his emotion, that I felt sincerely sorry for him, while the two
detectives smiled derisively, by no means displeased at this check which
he had met.

It cant be a coincidence, he cried, at last springing from his chair
and pacing wildly up and down the room; it is impossible that it should
be a mere coincidence. The very pills which I suspected in the case of
Drebber are actually found after the death of Stangerson. And yet they
are inert. What can it mean? Surely my whole chain of reasoning cannot
have been false. It is impossible! And yet this wretched dog is none the
worse. Ah, I have it! I have it! With a perfect shriek of delight he
rushed to the box, cut the other pill in two, dissolved it, added milk,
and presented it to the terrier. The unfortunate creatures tongue
seemed hardly to have been moistened in it before it gave a convulsive
shiver in every limb, and lay as rigid and lifeless as if it had been
struck by lightning.

Sherlock Holmes drew a long breath, and wiped the perspiration from his
forehead. I should have more faith, he said; I ought to know by
this time that when a fact appears to be opposed to a long train of
deductions, it invariably proves to be capable of bearing some other
interpretation. Of the two pills in that box one was of the most deadly
poison, and the other was entirely harmless. I ought to have known that
before ever I saw the box at all.

This last statement appeared to me to be so startling, that I could
hardly believe that he was in his sober senses. There was the dead dog,
however, to prove that his conjecture had been correct. It seemed to me
that the mists in my own mind were gradually clearing away, and I began
to have a dim, vague perception of the truth.

All this seems strange to you, continued Holmes, because you failed
at the beginning of the inquiry to grasp the importance of the single
real clue which was presented to you. I had the good fortune to seize
upon that, and everything which has occurred since then has served to
confirm my original supposition, and, indeed, was the logical sequence
of it. Hence things which have perplexed you and made the case more
obscure, have served to enlighten me and to strengthen my conclusions.
It is a mistake to confound strangeness with mystery. The most
commonplace crime is often the most mysterious because it presents no
new or special features from which deductions may be drawn. This murder
would have been infinitely more difficult to unravel had the body of
the victim been simply found lying in the roadway without any of
those _outr_ and sensational accompaniments which have rendered
it remarkable. These strange details, far from making the case more
difficult, have really had the effect of making it less so.

Mr. Gregson, who had listened to this address with considerable
impatience, could contain himself no longer. Look here, Mr. Sherlock
Holmes, he said, we are all ready to acknowledge that you are a smart
man, and that you have your own methods of working. We want something
more than mere theory and preaching now, though. It is a case of taking
the man. I have made my case out, and it seems I was wrong. Young
Charpentier could not have been engaged in this second affair. Lestrade
went after his man, Stangerson, and it appears that he was wrong too.
You have thrown out hints here, and hints there, and seem to know more
than we do, but the time has come when we feel that we have a right to
ask you straight how much you do know of the business. Can you name the
man who did it?

I cannot help feeling that Gregson is right, sir, remarked Lestrade.
We have both tried, and we have both failed. You have remarked more
than once since I have been in the room that you had all the evidence
which you require. Surely you will not withhold it any longer.

Any delay in arresting the assassin, I observed, might give him time
to perpetrate some fresh atrocity.

Thus pressed by us all, Holmes showed signs of irresolution. He
continued to walk up and down the room with his head sunk on his chest
and his brows drawn down, as was his habit when lost in thought.

There will be no more murders, he said at last, stopping abruptly and
facing us. You can put that consideration out of the question. You have
asked me if I know the name of the assassin. I do. The mere knowing of
his name is a small thing, however, compared with the power of laying
our hands upon him. This I expect very shortly to do. I have good hopes
of managing it through my own arrangements; but it is a thing which
needs delicate handling, for we have a shrewd and desperate man to deal
with, who is supported, as I have had occasion to prove, by another who
is as clever as himself. As long as this man has no idea that anyone
can have a clue there is some chance of securing him; but if he had the
slightest suspicion, he would change his name, and vanish in an instant
among the four million inhabitants of this great city. Without meaning
to hurt either of your feelings, I am bound to say that I consider these
men to be more than a match for the official force, and that is why I
have not asked your assistance. If I fail I shall, of course, incur all
the blame due to this omission; but that I am prepared for. At present
I am ready to promise that the instant that I can communicate with you
without endangering my own combinations, I shall do so.

Gregson and Lestrade seemed to be far from satisfied by this assurance,
or by the depreciating allusion to the detective police. The former had
flushed up to the roots of his flaxen hair, while the others beady eyes
glistened with curiosity and resentment. Neither of them had time to
speak, however, before there was a tap at the door, and the spokesman
of the street Arabs, young Wiggins, introduced his insignificant and
unsavoury person.

Please, sir, he said, touching his forelock, I have the cab
downstairs.

Good boy, said Holmes, blandly. Why dont you introduce this pattern
at Scotland Yard? he continued, taking a pair of steel handcuffs from
a drawer. See how beautifully the spring works. They fasten in an
instant.

The old pattern is good enough, remarked Lestrade, if we can only
find the man to put them on.

Very good, very good, said Holmes, smiling. The cabman may as well
help me with my boxes. Just ask him to step up, Wiggins.

I was surprised to find my companion speaking as though he were about
to set out on a journey, since he had not said anything to me about it.
There was a small portmanteau in the room, and this he pulled out and
began to strap. He was busily engaged at it when the cabman entered the
room.

Just give me a help with this buckle, cabman, he said, kneeling over
his task, and never turning his head.

The fellow came forward with a somewhat sullen, defiant air, and put
down his hands to assist. At that instant there was a sharp click, the
jangling of metal, and Sherlock Holmes sprang to his feet again.

Gentlemen, he cried, with flashing eyes, let me introduce you to Mr.
Jefferson Hope, the murderer of Enoch Drebber and of Joseph Stangerson.

The whole thing occurred in a moment--so quickly that I had no time
to realize it. I have a vivid recollection of that instant, of Holmes
triumphant expression and the ring of his voice, of the cabmans
dazed, savage face, as he glared at the glittering handcuffs, which had
appeared as if by magic upon his wrists. For a second or two we might
have been a group of statues. Then, with an inarticulate roar of fury,
the prisoner wrenched himself free from Holmess grasp, and hurled
himself through the window. Woodwork and glass gave way before him; but
before he got quite through, Gregson, Lestrade, and Holmes sprang upon
him like so many staghounds. He was dragged back into the room, and then
commenced a terrific conflict. So powerful and so fierce was he, that
the four of us were shaken off again and again. He appeared to have the
convulsive strength of a man in an epileptic fit. His face and hands
were terribly mangled by his passage through the glass, but loss of
blood had no effect in diminishing his resistance. It was not until
Lestrade succeeded in getting his hand inside his neckcloth and
half-strangling him that we made him realize that his struggles were of
no avail; and even then we felt no security until we had pinioned his
feet as well as his hands. That done, we rose to our feet breathless and
panting.

We have his cab, said Sherlock Holmes. It will serve to take him to
Scotland Yard. And now, gentlemen, he continued, with a pleasant smile,
we have reached the end of our little mystery. You are very welcome to
put any questions that you like to me now, and there is no danger that I
will refuse to answer them.





PART II. _The Country of the Saints._




CHAPTER I. ON THE GREAT ALKALI PLAIN.


IN the central portion of the great North American Continent there lies
an arid and repulsive desert, which for many a long year served as a
barrier against the advance of civilisation. From the Sierra Nevada to
Nebraska, and from the Yellowstone River in the north to the Colorado
upon the south, is a region of desolation and silence. Nor is Nature
always in one mood throughout this grim district. It comprises
snow-capped and lofty mountains, and dark and gloomy valleys. There are
swift-flowing rivers which dash through jagged caons; and there are
enormous plains, which in winter are white with snow, and in summer are
grey with the saline alkali dust. They all preserve, however, the common
characteristics of barrenness, inhospitality, and misery.

There are no inhabitants of this land of despair. A band of Pawnees
or of Blackfeet may occasionally traverse it in order to reach other
hunting-grounds, but the hardiest of the braves are glad to lose sight
of those awesome plains, and to find themselves once more upon their
prairies. The coyote skulks among the scrub, the buzzard flaps heavily
through the air, and the clumsy grizzly bear lumbers through the dark
ravines, and picks up such sustenance as it can amongst the rocks. These
are the sole dwellers in the wilderness.

In the whole world there can be no more dreary view than that from
the northern slope of the Sierra Blanco. As far as the eye can reach
stretches the great flat plain-land, all dusted over with patches of
alkali, and intersected by clumps of the dwarfish chaparral bushes. On
the extreme verge of the horizon lie a long chain of mountain peaks,
with their rugged summits flecked with snow. In this great stretch of
country there is no sign of life, nor of anything appertaining to life.
There is no bird in the steel-blue heaven, no movement upon the dull,
grey earth--above all, there is absolute silence. Listen as one may,
there is no shadow of a sound in all that mighty wilderness; nothing but
silence--complete and heart-subduing silence.

It has been said there is nothing appertaining to life upon the broad
plain. That is hardly true. Looking down from the Sierra Blanco, one
sees a pathway traced out across the desert, which winds away and is
lost in the extreme distance. It is rutted with wheels and trodden down
by the feet of many adventurers. Here and there there are scattered
white objects which glisten in the sun, and stand out against the dull
deposit of alkali. Approach, and examine them! They are bones: some
large and coarse, others smaller and more delicate. The former have
belonged to oxen, and the latter to men. For fifteen hundred miles one
may trace this ghastly caravan route by these scattered remains of those
who had fallen by the wayside.

Looking down on this very scene, there stood upon the fourth of May,
eighteen hundred and forty-seven, a solitary traveller. His appearance
was such that he might have been the very genius or demon of the region.
An observer would have found it difficult to say whether he was nearer
to forty or to sixty. His face was lean and haggard, and the brown
parchment-like skin was drawn tightly over the projecting bones; his
long, brown hair and beard were all flecked and dashed with white; his
eyes were sunken in his head, and burned with an unnatural lustre; while
the hand which grasped his rifle was hardly more fleshy than that of a
skeleton. As he stood, he leaned upon his weapon for support, and yet
his tall figure and the massive framework of his bones suggested a wiry
and vigorous constitution. His gaunt face, however, and his clothes,
which hung so baggily over his shrivelled limbs, proclaimed what it
was that gave him that senile and decrepit appearance. The man was
dying--dying from hunger and from thirst.

He had toiled painfully down the ravine, and on to this little
elevation, in the vain hope of seeing some signs of water. Now the great
salt plain stretched before his eyes, and the distant belt of savage
mountains, without a sign anywhere of plant or tree, which might
indicate the presence of moisture. In all that broad landscape there
was no gleam of hope. North, and east, and west he looked with wild
questioning eyes, and then he realised that his wanderings had come to
an end, and that there, on that barren crag, he was about to die. Why
not here, as well as in a feather bed, twenty years hence, he muttered,
as he seated himself in the shelter of a boulder.

Before sitting down, he had deposited upon the ground his useless rifle,
and also a large bundle tied up in a grey shawl, which he had carried
slung over his right shoulder. It appeared to be somewhat too heavy for
his strength, for in lowering it, it came down on the ground with some
little violence. Instantly there broke from the grey parcel a little
moaning cry, and from it there protruded a small, scared face, with very
bright brown eyes, and two little speckled, dimpled fists.

Youve hurt me! said a childish voice reproachfully.

Have I though, the man answered penitently, I didnt go for to do
it. As he spoke he unwrapped the grey shawl and extricated a pretty
little girl of about five years of age, whose dainty shoes and smart
pink frock with its little linen apron all bespoke a mothers care. The
child was pale and wan, but her healthy arms and legs showed that she
had suffered less than her companion.

How is it now? he answered anxiously, for she was still rubbing the
towsy golden curls which covered the back of her head.

Kiss it and make it well, she said, with perfect gravity, shoving
[19] the injured part up to him. Thats what mother used to do. Wheres
mother?

Mothers gone. I guess youll see her before long.

Gone, eh! said the little girl. Funny, she didnt say good-bye; she
most always did if she was just goin over to Aunties for tea, and now
shes been away three days. Say, its awful dry, aint it? Aint there
no water, nor nothing to eat?

No, there aint nothing, dearie. Youll just need to be patient awhile,
and then youll be all right. Put your head up agin me like that, and
then youll feel bullier. It aint easy to talk when your lips is like
leather, but I guess Id best let you know how the cards lie. Whats
that youve got?

Pretty things! fine things! cried the little girl enthusiastically,
holding up two glittering fragments of mica. When we goes back to home
Ill give them to brother Bob.

Youll see prettier things than them soon, said the man confidently.
You just wait a bit. I was going to tell you though--you remember when
we left the river?

Oh, yes.

Well, we reckoned wed strike another river soon, dye see. But there
was somethin wrong; compasses, or map, or somethin, and it didnt
turn up. Water ran out. Just except a little drop for the likes of you
and--and----

And you couldnt wash yourself, interrupted his companion gravely,
staring up at his grimy visage.

No, nor drink. And Mr. Bender, he was the fust to go, and then Indian
Pete, and then Mrs. McGregor, and then Johnny Hones, and then, dearie,
your mother.

Then mothers a deader too, cried the little girl dropping her face in
her pinafore and sobbing bitterly.

Yes, they all went except you and me. Then I thought there was some
chance of water in this direction, so I heaved you over my shoulder and
we tramped it together. It dont seem as though weve improved matters.
Theres an almighty small chance for us now!

Do you mean that we are going to die too? asked the child, checking
her sobs, and raising her tear-stained face.

I guess thats about the size of it.

Why didnt you say so before? she said, laughing gleefully. You gave
me such a fright. Why, of course, now as long as we die well be with
mother again.

Yes, you will, dearie.

And you too. Ill tell her how awful good youve been. Ill bet she
meets us at the door of Heaven with a big pitcher of water, and a lot
of buckwheat cakes, hot, and toasted on both sides, like Bob and me was
fond of. How long will it be first?

I dont know--not very long. The mans eyes were fixed upon the
northern horizon. In the blue vault of the heaven there had appeared
three little specks which increased in size every moment, so rapidly did
they approach. They speedily resolved themselves into three large brown
birds, which circled over the heads of the two wanderers, and then
settled upon some rocks which overlooked them. They were buzzards, the
vultures of the west, whose coming is the forerunner of death.

Cocks and hens, cried the little girl gleefully, pointing at their
ill-omened forms, and clapping her hands to make them rise. Say, did
God make this country?

In course He did, said her companion, rather startled by this
unexpected question.

He made the country down in Illinois, and He made the Missouri, the
little girl continued. I guess somebody else made the country in these
parts. Its not nearly so well done. They forgot the water and the
trees.

What would ye think of offering up prayer? the man asked diffidently.

It aint night yet, she answered.

It dont matter. It aint quite regular, but He wont mind that, you
bet. You say over them ones that you used to say every night in the
waggon when we was on the Plains.

Why dont you say some yourself? the child asked, with wondering eyes.

I disremember them, he answered. I haint said none since I was half
the height o that gun. I guess its never too late. You say them out,
and Ill stand by and come in on the choruses.

Then youll need to kneel down, and me too, she said, laying the shawl
out for that purpose. Youve got to put your hands up like this. It
makes you feel kind o good.

It was a strange sight had there been anything but the buzzards to see
it. Side by side on the narrow shawl knelt the two wanderers, the little
prattling child and the reckless, hardened adventurer. Her chubby face,
and his haggard, angular visage were both turned up to the cloudless
heaven in heartfelt entreaty to that dread being with whom they were
face to face, while the two voices--the one thin and clear, the other
deep and harsh--united in the entreaty for mercy and forgiveness. The
prayer finished, they resumed their seat in the shadow of the boulder
until the child fell asleep, nestling upon the broad breast of her
protector. He watched over her slumber for some time, but Nature proved
to be too strong for him. For three days and three nights he had allowed
himself neither rest nor repose. Slowly the eyelids drooped over the
tired eyes, and the head sunk lower and lower upon the breast, until the
mans grizzled beard was mixed with the gold tresses of his companion,
and both slept the same deep and dreamless slumber.

Had the wanderer remained awake for another half hour a strange sight
would have met his eyes. Far away on the extreme verge of the alkali
plain there rose up a little spray of dust, very slight at first, and
hardly to be distinguished from the mists of the distance, but gradually
growing higher and broader until it formed a solid, well-defined cloud.
This cloud continued to increase in size until it became evident that it
could only be raised by a great multitude of moving creatures. In more
fertile spots the observer would have come to the conclusion that one
of those great herds of bisons which graze upon the prairie land was
approaching him. This was obviously impossible in these arid wilds. As
the whirl of dust drew nearer to the solitary bluff upon which the two
castaways were reposing, the canvas-covered tilts of waggons and the
figures of armed horsemen began to show up through the haze, and the
apparition revealed itself as being a great caravan upon its journey for
the West. But what a caravan! When the head of it had reached the base
of the mountains, the rear was not yet visible on the horizon. Right
across the enormous plain stretched the straggling array, waggons
and carts, men on horseback, and men on foot. Innumerable women who
staggered along under burdens, and children who toddled beside the
waggons or peeped out from under the white coverings. This was evidently
no ordinary party of immigrants, but rather some nomad people who had
been compelled from stress of circumstances to seek themselves a new
country. There rose through the clear air a confused clattering and
rumbling from this great mass of humanity, with the creaking of wheels
and the neighing of horses. Loud as it was, it was not sufficient to
rouse the two tired wayfarers above them.

At the head of the column there rode a score or more of grave ironfaced
men, clad in sombre homespun garments and armed with rifles. On reaching
the base of the bluff they halted, and held a short council among
themselves.

The wells are to the right, my brothers, said one, a hard-lipped,
clean-shaven man with grizzly hair.

To the right of the Sierra Blanco--so we shall reach the Rio Grande,
 said another.

Fear not for water, cried a third. He who could draw it from the
rocks will not now abandon His own chosen people.

Amen! Amen! responded the whole party.

They were about to resume their journey when one of the youngest and
keenest-eyed uttered an exclamation and pointed up at the rugged crag
above them. From its summit there fluttered a little wisp of pink,
showing up hard and bright against the grey rocks behind. At the sight
there was a general reining up of horses and unslinging of guns, while
fresh horsemen came galloping up to reinforce the vanguard. The word
Redskins was on every lip.

There cant be any number of Injuns here, said the elderly man who
appeared to be in command. We have passed the Pawnees, and there are no
other tribes until we cross the great mountains.

Shall I go forward and see, Brother Stangerson, asked one of the band.

And I, and I, cried a dozen voices.

Leave your horses below and we will await you here, the Elder
answered. In a moment the young fellows had dismounted, fastened their
horses, and were ascending the precipitous slope which led up to the
object which had excited their curiosity. They advanced rapidly and
noiselessly, with the confidence and dexterity of practised scouts.
The watchers from the plain below could see them flit from rock to rock
until their figures stood out against the skyline. The young man who had
first given the alarm was leading them. Suddenly his followers saw him
throw up his hands, as though overcome with astonishment, and on joining
him they were affected in the same way by the sight which met their
eyes.

On the little plateau which crowned the barren hill there stood a
single giant boulder, and against this boulder there lay a tall man,
long-bearded and hard-featured, but of an excessive thinness. His placid
face and regular breathing showed that he was fast asleep. Beside him
lay a little child, with her round white arms encircling his brown
sinewy neck, and her golden haired head resting upon the breast of his
velveteen tunic. Her rosy lips were parted, showing the regular line of
snow-white teeth within, and a playful smile played over her infantile
features. Her plump little white legs terminating in white socks and
neat shoes with shining buckles, offered a strange contrast to the long
shrivelled members of her companion. On the ledge of rock above this
strange couple there stood three solemn buzzards, who, at the sight of
the new comers uttered raucous screams of disappointment and flapped
sullenly away.

The cries of the foul birds awoke the two sleepers who stared about [20]
them in bewilderment. The man staggered to his feet and looked down upon
the plain which had been so desolate when sleep had overtaken him, and
which was now traversed by this enormous body of men and of beasts. His
face assumed an expression of incredulity as he gazed, and he passed his
boney hand over his eyes. This is what they call delirium, I guess,
 he muttered. The child stood beside him, holding on to the skirt of
his coat, and said nothing but looked all round her with the wondering
questioning gaze of childhood.

The rescuing party were speedily able to convince the two castaways that
their appearance was no delusion. One of them seized the little girl,
and hoisted her upon his shoulder, while two others supported her gaunt
companion, and assisted him towards the waggons.

My name is John Ferrier, the wanderer explained; me and that little
un are all thats left o twenty-one people. The rest is all dead o
thirst and hunger away down in the south.

Is she your child? asked someone.

I guess she is now, the other cried, defiantly; shes mine cause I
saved her. No man will take her from me. Shes Lucy Ferrier from this
day on. Who are you, though? he continued, glancing with curiosity at
his stalwart, sunburned rescuers; there seems to be a powerful lot of
ye.

Nigh upon ten thousand, said one of the young men; we are the
persecuted children of God--the chosen of the Angel Merona.

I never heard tell on him, said the wanderer. He appears to have
chosen a fair crowd of ye.

Do not jest at that which is sacred, said the other sternly. We are
of those who believe in those sacred writings, drawn in Egyptian letters
on plates of beaten gold, which were handed unto the holy Joseph Smith
at Palmyra. We have come from Nauvoo, in the State of Illinois, where we
had founded our temple. We have come to seek a refuge from the violent
man and from the godless, even though it be the heart of the desert.

The name of Nauvoo evidently recalled recollections to John Ferrier. I
see, he said, you are the Mormons.

We are the Mormons, answered his companions with one voice.

And where are you going?

We do not know. The hand of God is leading us under the person of our
Prophet. You must come before him. He shall say what is to be done with
you.

They had reached the base of the hill by this time, and were surrounded
by crowds of the pilgrims--pale-faced meek-looking women, strong
laughing children, and anxious earnest-eyed men. Many were the cries
of astonishment and of commiseration which arose from them when they
perceived the youth of one of the strangers and the destitution of the
other. Their escort did not halt, however, but pushed on, followed by
a great crowd of Mormons, until they reached a waggon, which was
conspicuous for its great size and for the gaudiness and smartness of
its appearance. Six horses were yoked to it, whereas the others were
furnished with two, or, at most, four a-piece. Beside the driver there
sat a man who could not have been more than thirty years of age, but
whose massive head and resolute expression marked him as a leader. He
was reading a brown-backed volume, but as the crowd approached he laid
it aside, and listened attentively to an account of the episode. Then he
turned to the two castaways.

If we take you with us, he said, in solemn words, it can only be as
believers in our own creed. We shall have no wolves in our fold. Better
far that your bones should bleach in this wilderness than that you
should prove to be that little speck of decay which in time corrupts the
whole fruit. Will you come with us on these terms?

Guess Ill come with you on any terms, said Ferrier, with such
emphasis that the grave Elders could not restrain a smile. The leader
alone retained his stern, impressive expression.

Take him, Brother Stangerson, he said, give him food and drink,
and the child likewise. Let it be your task also to teach him our holy
creed. We have delayed long enough. Forward! On, on to Zion!

On, on to Zion! cried the crowd of Mormons, and the words rippled down
the long caravan, passing from mouth to mouth until they died away in a
dull murmur in the far distance. With a cracking of whips and a creaking
of wheels the great waggons got into motion, and soon the whole caravan
was winding along once more. The Elder to whose care the two waifs
had been committed, led them to his waggon, where a meal was already
awaiting them.

You shall remain here, he said. In a few days you will have recovered
from your fatigues. In the meantime, remember that now and for ever you
are of our religion. Brigham Young has said it, and he has spoken with
the voice of Joseph Smith, which is the voice of God.




CHAPTER II. THE FLOWER OF UTAH.


THIS is not the place to commemorate the trials and privations endured
by the immigrant Mormons before they came to their final haven. From the
shores of the Mississippi to the western slopes of the Rocky Mountains
they had struggled on with a constancy almost unparalleled in history.
The savage man, and the savage beast, hunger, thirst, fatigue, and
disease--every impediment which Nature could place in the way, had all
been overcome with Anglo-Saxon tenacity. Yet the long journey and the
accumulated terrors had shaken the hearts of the stoutest among them.
There was not one who did not sink upon his knees in heartfelt prayer
when they saw the broad valley of Utah bathed in the sunlight beneath
them, and learned from the lips of their leader that this was the
promised land, and that these virgin acres were to be theirs for
evermore.

Young speedily proved himself to be a skilful administrator as well as a
resolute chief. Maps were drawn and charts prepared, in which the future
city was sketched out. All around farms were apportioned and allotted in
proportion to the standing of each individual. The tradesman was put
to his trade and the artisan to his calling. In the town streets and
squares sprang up, as if by magic. In the country there was draining
and hedging, planting and clearing, until the next summer saw the whole
country golden with the wheat crop. Everything prospered in the strange
settlement. Above all, the great temple which they had erected in the
centre of the city grew ever taller and larger. From the first blush of
dawn until the closing of the twilight, the clatter of the hammer
and the rasp of the saw was never absent from the monument which the
immigrants erected to Him who had led them safe through many dangers.

The two castaways, John Ferrier and the little girl who had shared his
fortunes and had been adopted as his daughter, accompanied the Mormons
to the end of their great pilgrimage. Little Lucy Ferrier was borne
along pleasantly enough in Elder Stangersons waggon, a retreat which
she shared with the Mormons three wives and with his son, a headstrong
forward boy of twelve. Having rallied, with the elasticity of childhood,
from the shock caused by her mothers death, she soon became a pet
with the women, and reconciled herself to this new life in her moving
canvas-covered home. In the meantime Ferrier having recovered from his
privations, distinguished himself as a useful guide and an indefatigable
hunter. So rapidly did he gain the esteem of his new companions, that
when they reached the end of their wanderings, it was unanimously agreed
that he should be provided with as large and as fertile a tract of land
as any of the settlers, with the exception of Young himself, and of
Stangerson, Kemball, Johnston, and Drebber, who were the four principal
Elders.

On the farm thus acquired John Ferrier built himself a substantial
log-house, which received so many additions in succeeding years that it
grew into a roomy villa. He was a man of a practical turn of mind,
keen in his dealings and skilful with his hands. His iron constitution
enabled him to work morning and evening at improving and tilling his
lands. Hence it came about that his farm and all that belonged to
him prospered exceedingly. In three years he was better off than his
neighbours, in six he was well-to-do, in nine he was rich, and in twelve
there were not half a dozen men in the whole of Salt Lake City who could
compare with him. From the great inland sea to the distant Wahsatch
Mountains there was no name better known than that of John Ferrier.

There was one way and only one in which he offended the susceptibilities
of his co-religionists. No argument or persuasion could ever induce him
to set up a female establishment after the manner of his companions. He
never gave reasons for this persistent refusal, but contented himself by
resolutely and inflexibly adhering to his determination. There were some
who accused him of lukewarmness in his adopted religion, and others who
put it down to greed of wealth and reluctance to incur expense. Others,
again, spoke of some early love affair, and of a fair-haired girl who
had pined away on the shores of the Atlantic. Whatever the reason,
Ferrier remained strictly celibate. In every other respect he conformed
to the religion of the young settlement, and gained the name of being an
orthodox and straight-walking man.

Lucy Ferrier grew up within the log-house, and assisted her adopted
father in all his undertakings. The keen air of the mountains and the
balsamic odour of the pine trees took the place of nurse and mother to
the young girl. As year succeeded to year she grew taller and stronger,
her cheek more rudy, and her step more elastic. Many a wayfarer upon
the high road which ran by Ferriers farm felt long-forgotten thoughts
revive in their mind as they watched her lithe girlish figure tripping
through the wheatfields, or met her mounted upon her fathers mustang,
and managing it with all the ease and grace of a true child of the West.
So the bud blossomed into a flower, and the year which saw her father
the richest of the farmers left her as fair a specimen of American
girlhood as could be found in the whole Pacific slope.

It was not the father, however, who first discovered that the child had
developed into the woman. It seldom is in such cases. That mysterious
change is too subtle and too gradual to be measured by dates. Least of
all does the maiden herself know it until the tone of a voice or the
touch of a hand sets her heart thrilling within her, and she learns,
with a mixture of pride and of fear, that a new and a larger nature has
awoken within her. There are few who cannot recall that day and remember
the one little incident which heralded the dawn of a new life. In the
case of Lucy Ferrier the occasion was serious enough in itself, apart
from its future influence on her destiny and that of many besides.

It was a warm June morning, and the Latter Day Saints were as busy as
the bees whose hive they have chosen for their emblem. In the fields and
in the streets rose the same hum of human industry. Down the dusty high
roads defiled long streams of heavily-laden mules, all heading to the
west, for the gold fever had broken out in California, and the Overland
Route lay through the City of the Elect. There, too, were droves of
sheep and bullocks coming in from the outlying pasture lands, and trains
of tired immigrants, men and horses equally weary of their interminable
journey. Through all this motley assemblage, threading her way with the
skill of an accomplished rider, there galloped Lucy Ferrier, her fair
face flushed with the exercise and her long chestnut hair floating out
behind her. She had a commission from her father in the City, and was
dashing in as she had done many a time before, with all the fearlessness
of youth, thinking only of her task and how it was to be performed. The
travel-stained adventurers gazed after her in astonishment, and even
the unemotional Indians, journeying in with their pelties, relaxed their
accustomed stoicism as they marvelled at the beauty of the pale-faced
maiden.

She had reached the outskirts of the city when she found the road
blocked by a great drove of cattle, driven by a half-dozen wild-looking
herdsmen from the plains. In her impatience she endeavoured to pass this
obstacle by pushing her horse into what appeared to be a gap. Scarcely
had she got fairly into it, however, before the beasts closed in behind
her, and she found herself completely imbedded in the moving stream of
fierce-eyed, long-horned bullocks. Accustomed as she was to deal with
cattle, she was not alarmed at her situation, but took advantage of
every opportunity to urge her horse on in the hopes of pushing her way
through the cavalcade. Unfortunately the horns of one of the creatures,
either by accident or design, came in violent contact with the flank of
the mustang, and excited it to madness. In an instant it reared up upon
its hind legs with a snort of rage, and pranced and tossed in a way that
would have unseated any but a most skilful rider. The situation was full
of peril. Every plunge of the excited horse brought it against the horns
again, and goaded it to fresh madness. It was all that the girl could
do to keep herself in the saddle, yet a slip would mean a terrible death
under the hoofs of the unwieldy and terrified animals. Unaccustomed to
sudden emergencies, her head began to swim, and her grip upon the bridle
to relax. Choked by the rising cloud of dust and by the steam from the
struggling creatures, she might have abandoned her efforts in despair,
but for a kindly voice at her elbow which assured her of assistance. At
the same moment a sinewy brown hand caught the frightened horse by
the curb, and forcing a way through the drove, soon brought her to the
outskirts.

Youre not hurt, I hope, miss, said her preserver, respectfully.

She looked up at his dark, fierce face, and laughed saucily. Im awful
frightened, she said, naively; whoever would have thought that Poncho
would have been so scared by a lot of cows?

Thank God you kept your seat, the other said earnestly. He was a tall,
savage-looking young fellow, mounted on a powerful roan horse, and
clad in the rough dress of a hunter, with a long rifle slung over his
shoulders. I guess you are the daughter of John Ferrier, he remarked,
I saw you ride down from his house. When you see him, ask him if he
remembers the Jefferson Hopes of St. Louis. If hes the same Ferrier, my
father and he were pretty thick.

Hadnt you better come and ask yourself? she asked, demurely.

The young fellow seemed pleased at the suggestion, and his dark eyes
sparkled with pleasure. Ill do so, he said, weve been in the
mountains for two months, and are not over and above in visiting
condition. He must take us as he finds us.

He has a good deal to thank you for, and so have I, she answered,
hes awful fond of me. If those cows had jumped on me hed have never
got over it.

Neither would I, said her companion.

You! Well, I dont see that it would make much matter to you, anyhow.
You aint even a friend of ours.

The young hunters dark face grew so gloomy over this remark that Lucy
Ferrier laughed aloud.

There, I didnt mean that, she said; of course, you are a friend now.
You must come and see us. Now I must push along, or father wont trust
me with his business any more. Good-bye!

Good-bye, he answered, raising his broad sombrero, and bending over
her little hand. She wheeled her mustang round, gave it a cut with her
riding-whip, and darted away down the broad road in a rolling cloud of
dust.

Young Jefferson Hope rode on with his companions, gloomy and taciturn.
He and they had been among the Nevada Mountains prospecting for silver,
and were returning to Salt Lake City in the hope of raising capital
enough to work some lodes which they had discovered. He had been as keen
as any of them upon the business until this sudden incident had drawn
his thoughts into another channel. The sight of the fair young girl,
as frank and wholesome as the Sierra breezes, had stirred his volcanic,
untamed heart to its very depths. When she had vanished from his sight,
he realized that a crisis had come in his life, and that neither silver
speculations nor any other questions could ever be of such importance to
him as this new and all-absorbing one. The love which had sprung up in
his heart was not the sudden, changeable fancy of a boy, but rather the
wild, fierce passion of a man of strong will and imperious temper. He
had been accustomed to succeed in all that he undertook. He swore in
his heart that he would not fail in this if human effort and human
perseverance could render him successful.

He called on John Ferrier that night, and many times again, until
his face was a familiar one at the farm-house. John, cooped up in the
valley, and absorbed in his work, had had little chance of learning
the news of the outside world during the last twelve years. All this
Jefferson Hope was able to tell him, and in a style which interested
Lucy as well as her father. He had been a pioneer in California, and
could narrate many a strange tale of fortunes made and fortunes lost
in those wild, halcyon days. He had been a scout too, and a trapper, a
silver explorer, and a ranchman. Wherever stirring adventures were to be
had, Jefferson Hope had been there in search of them. He soon became a
favourite with the old farmer, who spoke eloquently of his virtues. On
such occasions, Lucy was silent, but her blushing cheek and her bright,
happy eyes, showed only too clearly that her young heart was no longer
her own. Her honest father may not have observed these symptoms,
but they were assuredly not thrown away upon the man who had won her
affections.

It was a summer evening when he came galloping down the road and pulled
up at the gate. She was at the doorway, and came down to meet him. He
threw the bridle over the fence and strode up the pathway.

I am off, Lucy, he said, taking her two hands in his, and gazing
tenderly down into her face; I wont ask you to come with me now, but
will you be ready to come when I am here again?

And when will that be? she asked, blushing and laughing.

A couple of months at the outside. I will come and claim you then, my
darling. Theres no one who can stand between us.

And how about father? she asked.

He has given his consent, provided we get these mines working all
right. I have no fear on that head.

Oh, well; of course, if you and father have arranged it all, theres
no more to be said, she whispered, with her cheek against his broad
breast.

Thank God! he said, hoarsely, stooping and kissing her. It is
settled, then. The longer I stay, the harder it will be to go. They are
waiting for me at the caon. Good-bye, my own darling--good-bye. In two
months you shall see me.

He tore himself from her as he spoke, and, flinging himself upon his
horse, galloped furiously away, never even looking round, as though
afraid that his resolution might fail him if he took one glance at
what he was leaving. She stood at the gate, gazing after him until
he vanished from her sight. Then she walked back into the house, the
happiest girl in all Utah.




CHAPTER III. JOHN FERRIER TALKS WITH THE PROPHET.


THREE weeks had passed since Jefferson Hope and his comrades had
departed from Salt Lake City. John Ferriers heart was sore within him
when he thought of the young mans return, and of the impending loss of
his adopted child. Yet her bright and happy face reconciled him to
the arrangement more than any argument could have done. He had always
determined, deep down in his resolute heart, that nothing would ever
induce him to allow his daughter to wed a Mormon. Such a marriage he
regarded as no marriage at all, but as a shame and a disgrace. Whatever
he might think of the Mormon doctrines, upon that one point he was
inflexible. He had to seal his mouth on the subject, however, for to
express an unorthodox opinion was a dangerous matter in those days in
the Land of the Saints.

Yes, a dangerous matter--so dangerous that even the most saintly dared
only whisper their religious opinions with bated breath, lest something
which fell from their lips might be misconstrued, and bring down a
swift retribution upon them. The victims of persecution had now turned
persecutors on their own account, and persecutors of the most
terrible description. Not the Inquisition of Seville, nor the German
Vehm-gericht, nor the Secret Societies of Italy, were ever able to put
a more formidable machinery in motion than that which cast a cloud over
the State of Utah.

Its invisibility, and the mystery which was attached to it, made
this organization doubly terrible. It appeared to be omniscient and
omnipotent, and yet was neither seen nor heard. The man who held out
against the Church vanished away, and none knew whither he had gone or
what had befallen him. His wife and his children awaited him at home,
but no father ever returned to tell them how he had fared at the
hands of his secret judges. A rash word or a hasty act was followed
by annihilation, and yet none knew what the nature might be of this
terrible power which was suspended over them. No wonder that men
went about in fear and trembling, and that even in the heart of the
wilderness they dared not whisper the doubts which oppressed them.

At first this vague and terrible power was exercised only upon the
recalcitrants who, having embraced the Mormon faith, wished afterwards
to pervert or to abandon it. Soon, however, it took a wider range. The
supply of adult women was running short, and polygamy without a female
population on which to draw was a barren doctrine indeed. Strange
rumours began to be bandied about--rumours of murdered immigrants and
rifled camps in regions where Indians had never been seen. Fresh women
appeared in the harems of the Elders--women who pined and wept, and
bore upon their faces the traces of an unextinguishable horror. Belated
wanderers upon the mountains spoke of gangs of armed men, masked,
stealthy, and noiseless, who flitted by them in the darkness. These
tales and rumours took substance and shape, and were corroborated and
re-corroborated, until they resolved themselves into a definite name.
To this day, in the lonely ranches of the West, the name of the Danite
Band, or the Avenging Angels, is a sinister and an ill-omened one.

Fuller knowledge of the organization which produced such terrible
results served to increase rather than to lessen the horror which it
inspired in the minds of men. None knew who belonged to this ruthless
society. The names of the participators in the deeds of blood and
violence done under the name of religion were kept profoundly secret.
The very friend to whom you communicated your misgivings as to the
Prophet and his mission, might be one of those who would come forth at
night with fire and sword to exact a terrible reparation. Hence every
man feared his neighbour, and none spoke of the things which were
nearest his heart.

One fine morning, John Ferrier was about to set out to his wheatfields,
when he heard the click of the latch, and, looking through the window,
saw a stout, sandy-haired, middle-aged man coming up the pathway. His
heart leapt to his mouth, for this was none other than the great Brigham
Young himself. Full of trepidation--for he knew that such a visit boded
him little good--Ferrier ran to the door to greet the Mormon chief. The
latter, however, received his salutations coldly, and followed him with
a stern face into the sitting-room.

Brother Ferrier, he said, taking a seat, and eyeing the farmer keenly
from under his light-coloured eyelashes, the true believers have been
good friends to you. We picked you up when you were starving in the
desert, we shared our food with you, led you safe to the Chosen Valley,
gave you a goodly share of land, and allowed you to wax rich under our
protection. Is not this so?

It is so, answered John Ferrier.

In return for all this we asked but one condition: that was, that you
should embrace the true faith, and conform in every way to its usages.
This you promised to do, and this, if common report says truly, you have
neglected.

And how have I neglected it? asked Ferrier, throwing out his hands in
expostulation. Have I not given to the common fund? Have I not attended
at the Temple? Have I not----?

Where are your wives? asked Young, looking round him. Call them in,
that I may greet them.

It is true that I have not married, Ferrier answered. But women
were few, and there were many who had better claims than I. I was not a
lonely man: I had my daughter to attend to my wants.

It is of that daughter that I would speak to you, said the leader
of the Mormons. She has grown to be the flower of Utah, and has found
favour in the eyes of many who are high in the land.

John Ferrier groaned internally.

There are stories of her which I would fain disbelieve--stories that
she is sealed to some Gentile. This must be the gossip of idle tongues.
What is the thirteenth rule in the code of the sainted Joseph Smith?
Let every maiden of the true faith marry one of the elect; for if
she wed a Gentile, she commits a grievous sin. This being so, it is
impossible that you, who profess the holy creed, should suffer your
daughter to violate it.

John Ferrier made no answer, but he played nervously with his
riding-whip.

Upon this one point your whole faith shall be tested--so it has been
decided in the Sacred Council of Four. The girl is young, and we would
not have her wed grey hairs, neither would we deprive her of all
choice. We Elders have many heifers, [29] but our children must also
be provided. Stangerson has a son, and Drebber has a son, and either of
them would gladly welcome your daughter to their house. Let her choose
between them. They are young and rich, and of the true faith. What say
you to that?

Ferrier remained silent for some little time with his brows knitted.

You will give us time, he said at last. My daughter is very
young--she is scarce of an age to marry.

She shall have a month to choose, said Young, rising from his seat.
At the end of that time she shall give her answer.

He was passing through the door, when he turned, with flushed face and
flashing eyes. It were better for you, John Ferrier, he thundered,
that you and she were now lying blanched skeletons upon the Sierra
Blanco, than that you should put your weak wills against the orders of
the Holy Four!

With a threatening gesture of his hand, he turned from the door, and
Ferrier heard his heavy step scrunching along the shingly path.

He was still sitting with his elbows upon his knees, considering how he
should broach the matter to his daughter when a soft hand was laid upon
his, and looking up, he saw her standing beside him. One glance at her
pale, frightened face showed him that she had heard what had passed.

I could not help it, she said, in answer to his look. His voice rang
through the house. Oh, father, father, what shall we do?

Dont you scare yourself, he answered, drawing her to him, and passing
his broad, rough hand caressingly over her chestnut hair. Well fix it
up somehow or another. You dont find your fancy kind o lessening for
this chap, do you?

A sob and a squeeze of his hand was her only answer.

No; of course not. I shouldnt care to hear you say you did. Hes a
likely lad, and hes a Christian, which is more than these folk here, in
spite o all their praying and preaching. Theres a party starting for
Nevada to-morrow, and Ill manage to send him a message letting him know
the hole we are in. If I know anything o that young man, hell be back
here with a speed that would whip electro-telegraphs.

Lucy laughed through her tears at her fathers description.

When he comes, he will advise us for the best. But it is for you that
I am frightened, dear. One hears--one hears such dreadful stories about
those who oppose the Prophet: something terrible always happens to
them.

But we havent opposed him yet, her father answered. It will be time
to look out for squalls when we do. We have a clear month before us; at
the end of that, I guess we had best shin out of Utah.

Leave Utah!

Thats about the size of it.

But the farm?

We will raise as much as we can in money, and let the rest go. To tell
the truth, Lucy, it isnt the first time I have thought of doing it. I
dont care about knuckling under to any man, as these folk do to their
darned prophet. Im a free-born American, and its all new to me. Guess
Im too old to learn. If he comes browsing about this farm, he might
chance to run up against a charge of buckshot travelling in the opposite
direction.

But they wont let us leave, his daughter objected.

Wait till Jefferson comes, and well soon manage that. In the meantime,
dont you fret yourself, my dearie, and dont get your eyes swelled up,
else hell be walking into me when he sees you. Theres nothing to be
afeared about, and theres no danger at all.

John Ferrier uttered these consoling remarks in a very confident tone,
but she could not help observing that he paid unusual care to the
fastening of the doors that night, and that he carefully cleaned and
loaded the rusty old shotgun which hung upon the wall of his bedroom.




CHAPTER IV. A FLIGHT FOR LIFE.


ON the morning which followed his interview with the Mormon Prophet,
John Ferrier went in to Salt Lake City, and having found his
acquaintance, who was bound for the Nevada Mountains, he entrusted him
with his message to Jefferson Hope. In it he told the young man of the
imminent danger which threatened them, and how necessary it was that he
should return. Having done thus he felt easier in his mind, and returned
home with a lighter heart.

As he approached his farm, he was surprised to see a horse hitched to
each of the posts of the gate. Still more surprised was he on entering
to find two young men in possession of his sitting-room. One, with a
long pale face, was leaning back in the rocking-chair, with his feet
cocked up upon the stove. The other, a bull-necked youth with coarse
bloated features, was standing in front of the window with his hands in
his pocket, whistling a popular hymn. Both of them nodded to Ferrier as
he entered, and the one in the rocking-chair commenced the conversation.

Maybe you dont know us, he said. This here is the son of Elder
Drebber, and Im Joseph Stangerson, who travelled with you in the desert
when the Lord stretched out His hand and gathered you into the true
fold.

As He will all the nations in His own good time, said the other in a
nasal voice; He grindeth slowly but exceeding small.

John Ferrier bowed coldly. He had guessed who his visitors were.

We have come, continued Stangerson, at the advice of our fathers to
solicit the hand of your daughter for whichever of us may seem good to
you and to her. As I have but four wives and Brother Drebber here has
seven, it appears to me that my claim is the stronger one.

Nay, nay, Brother Stangerson, cried the other; the question is not
how many wives we have, but how many we can keep. My father has now
given over his mills to me, and I am the richer man.

But my prospects are better, said the other, warmly. When the
Lord removes my father, I shall have his tanning yard and his leather
factory. Then I am your elder, and am higher in the Church.

It will be for the maiden to decide, rejoined young Drebber, smirking
at his own reflection in the glass. We will leave it all to her
decision.

During this dialogue, John Ferrier had stood fuming in the doorway,
hardly able to keep his riding-whip from the backs of his two visitors.

Look here, he said at last, striding up to them, when my daughter
summons you, you can come, but until then I dont want to see your faces
again.

The two young Mormons stared at him in amazement. In their eyes this
competition between them for the maidens hand was the highest of
honours both to her and her father.

There are two ways out of the room, cried Ferrier; there is the door,
and there is the window. Which do you care to use?

His brown face looked so savage, and his gaunt hands so threatening,
that his visitors sprang to their feet and beat a hurried retreat. The
old farmer followed them to the door.

Let me know when you have settled which it is to be, he said,
sardonically.

You shall smart for this! Stangerson cried, white with rage. You have
defied the Prophet and the Council of Four. You shall rue it to the end
of your days.

The hand of the Lord shall be heavy upon you, cried young Drebber; He
will arise and smite you!

Then Ill start the smiting, exclaimed Ferrier furiously, and would
have rushed upstairs for his gun had not Lucy seized him by the arm and
restrained him. Before he could escape from her, the clatter of horses
hoofs told him that they were beyond his reach.

The young canting rascals! he exclaimed, wiping the perspiration from
his forehead; I would sooner see you in your grave, my girl, than the
wife of either of them.

And so should I, father, she answered, with spirit; but Jefferson
will soon be here.

Yes. It will not be long before he comes. The sooner the better, for we
do not know what their next move may be.

It was, indeed, high time that someone capable of giving advice and
help should come to the aid of the sturdy old farmer and his adopted
daughter. In the whole history of the settlement there had never been
such a case of rank disobedience to the authority of the Elders. If
minor errors were punished so sternly, what would be the fate of this
arch rebel. Ferrier knew that his wealth and position would be of no
avail to him. Others as well known and as rich as himself had been
spirited away before now, and their goods given over to the Church. He
was a brave man, but he trembled at the vague, shadowy terrors which
hung over him. Any known danger he could face with a firm lip, but
this suspense was unnerving. He concealed his fears from his daughter,
however, and affected to make light of the whole matter, though she,
with the keen eye of love, saw plainly that he was ill at ease.

He expected that he would receive some message or remonstrance from
Young as to his conduct, and he was not mistaken, though it came in an
unlooked-for manner. Upon rising next morning he found, to his surprise,
a small square of paper pinned on to the coverlet of his bed just over
his chest. On it was printed, in bold straggling letters:--

Twenty-nine days are given you for amendment, and then----

The dash was more fear-inspiring than any threat could have been. How
this warning came into his room puzzled John Ferrier sorely, for his
servants slept in an outhouse, and the doors and windows had all been
secured. He crumpled the paper up and said nothing to his daughter, but
the incident struck a chill into his heart. The twenty-nine days were
evidently the balance of the month which Young had promised. What
strength or courage could avail against an enemy armed with such
mysterious powers? The hand which fastened that pin might have struck
him to the heart, and he could never have known who had slain him.

Still more shaken was he next morning. They had sat down to their
breakfast when Lucy with a cry of surprise pointed upwards. In the
centre of the ceiling was scrawled, with a burned stick apparently,
the number 28. To his daughter it was unintelligible, and he did not
enlighten her. That night he sat up with his gun and kept watch and
ward. He saw and he heard nothing, and yet in the morning a great 27 had
been painted upon the outside of his door.

Thus day followed day; and as sure as morning came he found that his
unseen enemies had kept their register, and had marked up in some
conspicuous position how many days were still left to him out of the
month of grace. Sometimes the fatal numbers appeared upon the walls,
sometimes upon the floors, occasionally they were on small placards
stuck upon the garden gate or the railings. With all his vigilance John
Ferrier could not discover whence these daily warnings proceeded. A
horror which was almost superstitious came upon him at the sight of
them. He became haggard and restless, and his eyes had the troubled look
of some hunted creature. He had but one hope in life now, and that was
for the arrival of the young hunter from Nevada.

Twenty had changed to fifteen and fifteen to ten, but there was no news
of the absentee. One by one the numbers dwindled down, and still there
came no sign of him. Whenever a horseman clattered down the road, or a
driver shouted at his team, the old farmer hurried to the gate thinking
that help had arrived at last. At last, when he saw five give way to
four and that again to three, he lost heart, and abandoned all hope of
escape. Single-handed, and with his limited knowledge of the mountains
which surrounded the settlement, he knew that he was powerless. The
more-frequented roads were strictly watched and guarded, and none could
pass along them without an order from the Council. Turn which way he
would, there appeared to be no avoiding the blow which hung over him.
Yet the old man never wavered in his resolution to part with life itself
before he consented to what he regarded as his daughters dishonour.

He was sitting alone one evening pondering deeply over his troubles, and
searching vainly for some way out of them. That morning had shown the
figure 2 upon the wall of his house, and the next day would be the last
of the allotted time. What was to happen then? All manner of vague and
terrible fancies filled his imagination. And his daughter--what was to
become of her after he was gone? Was there no escape from the invisible
network which was drawn all round them. He sank his head upon the table
and sobbed at the thought of his own impotence.

What was that? In the silence he heard a gentle scratching sound--low,
but very distinct in the quiet of the night. It came from the door of
the house. Ferrier crept into the hall and listened intently. There
was a pause for a few moments, and then the low insidious sound was
repeated. Someone was evidently tapping very gently upon one of the
panels of the door. Was it some midnight assassin who had come to carry
out the murderous orders of the secret tribunal? Or was it some agent
who was marking up that the last day of grace had arrived. John Ferrier
felt that instant death would be better than the suspense which shook
his nerves and chilled his heart. Springing forward he drew the bolt and
threw the door open.

Outside all was calm and quiet. The night was fine, and the stars were
twinkling brightly overhead. The little front garden lay before the
farmers eyes bounded by the fence and gate, but neither there nor on
the road was any human being to be seen. With a sigh of relief, Ferrier
looked to right and to left, until happening to glance straight down at
his own feet he saw to his astonishment a man lying flat upon his face
upon the ground, with arms and legs all asprawl.

So unnerved was he at the sight that he leaned up against the wall with
his hand to his throat to stifle his inclination to call out. His first
thought was that the prostrate figure was that of some wounded or dying
man, but as he watched it he saw it writhe along the ground and into the
hall with the rapidity and noiselessness of a serpent. Once within the
house the man sprang to his feet, closed the door, and revealed to the
astonished farmer the fierce face and resolute expression of Jefferson
Hope.

Good God! gasped John Ferrier. How you scared me! Whatever made you
come in like that.

Give me food, the other said, hoarsely. I have had no time for bite
or sup for eight-and-forty hours. He flung himself upon the [21] cold
meat and bread which were still lying upon the table from his hosts
supper, and devoured it voraciously. Does Lucy bear up well? he asked,
when he had satisfied his hunger.

Yes. She does not know the danger, her father answered.

That is well. The house is watched on every side. That is why I crawled
my way up to it. They may be darned sharp, but theyre not quite sharp
enough to catch a Washoe hunter.

John Ferrier felt a different man now that he realized that he had
a devoted ally. He seized the young mans leathery hand and wrung it
cordially. Youre a man to be proud of, he said. There are not many
who would come to share our danger and our troubles.

Youve hit it there, pard, the young hunter answered. I have a
respect for you, but if you were alone in this business Id think twice
before I put my head into such a hornets nest. Its Lucy that brings me
here, and before harm comes on her I guess there will be one less o the
Hope family in Utah.

What are we to do?

To-morrow is your last day, and unless you act to-night you are lost.
I have a mule and two horses waiting in the Eagle Ravine. How much money
have you?

Two thousand dollars in gold, and five in notes.

That will do. I have as much more to add to it. We must push for Carson
City through the mountains. You had best wake Lucy. It is as well that
the servants do not sleep in the house.

While Ferrier was absent, preparing his daughter for the approaching
journey, Jefferson Hope packed all the eatables that he could find into
a small parcel, and filled a stoneware jar with water, for he knew by
experience that the mountain wells were few and far between. He had
hardly completed his arrangements before the farmer returned with his
daughter all dressed and ready for a start. The greeting between the
lovers was warm, but brief, for minutes were precious, and there was
much to be done.

We must make our start at once, said Jefferson Hope, speaking in a low
but resolute voice, like one who realizes the greatness of the peril,
but has steeled his heart to meet it. The front and back entrances are
watched, but with caution we may get away through the side window and
across the fields. Once on the road we are only two miles from the
Ravine where the horses are waiting. By daybreak we should be half-way
through the mountains.

What if we are stopped, asked Ferrier.

Hope slapped the revolver butt which protruded from the front of his
tunic. If they are too many for us we shall take two or three of them
with us, he said with a sinister smile.

The lights inside the house had all been extinguished, and from the
darkened window Ferrier peered over the fields which had been his own,
and which he was now about to abandon for ever. He had long nerved
himself to the sacrifice, however, and the thought of the honour and
happiness of his daughter outweighed any regret at his ruined fortunes.
All looked so peaceful and happy, the rustling trees and the broad
silent stretch of grain-land, that it was difficult to realize that
the spirit of murder lurked through it all. Yet the white face and set
expression of the young hunter showed that in his approach to the house
he had seen enough to satisfy him upon that head.

Ferrier carried the bag of gold and notes, Jefferson Hope had the scanty
provisions and water, while Lucy had a small bundle containing a few
of her more valued possessions. Opening the window very slowly and
carefully, they waited until a dark cloud had somewhat obscured the
night, and then one by one passed through into the little garden. With
bated breath and crouching figures they stumbled across it, and gained
the shelter of the hedge, which they skirted until they came to the gap
which opened into the cornfields. They had just reached this point when
the young man seized his two companions and dragged them down into the
shadow, where they lay silent and trembling.

It was as well that his prairie training had given Jefferson Hope the
ears of a lynx. He and his friends had hardly crouched down before the
melancholy hooting of a mountain owl was heard within a few yards
of them, which was immediately answered by another hoot at a small
distance. At the same moment a vague shadowy figure emerged from the
gap for which they had been making, and uttered the plaintive signal cry
again, on which a second man appeared out of the obscurity.

To-morrow at midnight, said the first who appeared to be in authority.
When the Whip-poor-Will calls three times.

It is well, returned the other. Shall I tell Brother Drebber?

Pass it on to him, and from him to the others. Nine to seven!

Seven to five! repeated the other, and the two figures flitted away
in different directions. Their concluding words had evidently been some
form of sign and countersign. The instant that their footsteps had died
away in the distance, Jefferson Hope sprang to his feet, and helping his
companions through the gap, led the way across the fields at the top
of his speed, supporting and half-carrying the girl when her strength
appeared to fail her.

Hurry on! hurry on! he gasped from time to time. We are through the
line of sentinels. Everything depends on speed. Hurry on!

Once on the high road they made rapid progress. Only once did they
meet anyone, and then they managed to slip into a field, and so avoid
recognition. Before reaching the town the hunter branched away into a
rugged and narrow footpath which led to the mountains. Two dark jagged
peaks loomed above them through the darkness, and the defile which led
between them was the Eagle Caon in which the horses were awaiting them.
With unerring instinct Jefferson Hope picked his way among the great
boulders and along the bed of a dried-up watercourse, until he came to
the retired corner, screened with rocks, where the faithful animals had
been picketed. The girl was placed upon the mule, and old Ferrier upon
one of the horses, with his money-bag, while Jefferson Hope led the
other along the precipitous and dangerous path.

It was a bewildering route for anyone who was not accustomed to face
Nature in her wildest moods. On the one side a great crag towered up a
thousand feet or more, black, stern, and menacing, with long basaltic
columns upon its rugged surface like the ribs of some petrified monster.
On the other hand a wild chaos of boulders and debris made all advance
impossible. Between the two ran the irregular track, so narrow in places
that they had to travel in Indian file, and so rough that only practised
riders could have traversed it at all. Yet in spite of all dangers and
difficulties, the hearts of the fugitives were light within them,
for every step increased the distance between them and the terrible
despotism from which they were flying.

They soon had a proof, however, that they were still within the
jurisdiction of the Saints. They had reached the very wildest and most
desolate portion of the pass when the girl gave a startled cry, and
pointed upwards. On a rock which overlooked the track, showing out dark
and plain against the sky, there stood a solitary sentinel. He saw them
as soon as they perceived him, and his military challenge of Who goes
there? rang through the silent ravine.

Travellers for Nevada, said Jefferson Hope, with his hand upon the
rifle which hung by his saddle.

They could see the lonely watcher fingering his gun, and peering down at
them as if dissatisfied at their reply.

By whose permission? he asked.

The Holy Four, answered Ferrier. His Mormon experiences had taught him
that that was the highest authority to which he could refer.

Nine from seven, cried the sentinel.

Seven from five, returned Jefferson Hope promptly, remembering the
countersign which he had heard in the garden.

Pass, and the Lord go with you, said the voice from above. Beyond his
post the path broadened out, and the horses were able to break into a
trot. Looking back, they could see the solitary watcher leaning upon
his gun, and knew that they had passed the outlying post of the chosen
people, and that freedom lay before them.




CHAPTER V. THE AVENGING ANGELS.


ALL night their course lay through intricate defiles and over irregular
and rock-strewn paths. More than once they lost their way, but Hopes
intimate knowledge of the mountains enabled them to regain the track
once more. When morning broke, a scene of marvellous though savage
beauty lay before them. In every direction the great snow-capped peaks
hemmed them in, peeping over each others shoulders to the far horizon.
So steep were the rocky banks on either side of them, that the larch
and the pine seemed to be suspended over their heads, and to need only a
gust of wind to come hurtling down upon them. Nor was the fear entirely
an illusion, for the barren valley was thickly strewn with trees and
boulders which had fallen in a similar manner. Even as they passed,
a great rock came thundering down with a hoarse rattle which woke
the echoes in the silent gorges, and startled the weary horses into a
gallop.

As the sun rose slowly above the eastern horizon, the caps of the great
mountains lit up one after the other, like lamps at a festival, until
they were all ruddy and glowing. The magnificent spectacle cheered the
hearts of the three fugitives and gave them fresh energy. At a wild
torrent which swept out of a ravine they called a halt and watered their
horses, while they partook of a hasty breakfast. Lucy and her father
would fain have rested longer, but Jefferson Hope was inexorable. They
will be upon our track by this time, he said. Everything depends upon
our speed. Once safe in Carson we may rest for the remainder of our
lives.

During the whole of that day they struggled on through the defiles, and
by evening they calculated that they were more than thirty miles from
their enemies. At night-time they chose the base of a beetling crag,
where the rocks offered some protection from the chill wind, and there
huddled together for warmth, they enjoyed a few hours sleep. Before
daybreak, however, they were up and on their way once more. They had
seen no signs of any pursuers, and Jefferson Hope began to think that
they were fairly out of the reach of the terrible organization whose
enmity they had incurred. He little knew how far that iron grasp could
reach, or how soon it was to close upon them and crush them.

About the middle of the second day of their flight their scanty store
of provisions began to run out. This gave the hunter little uneasiness,
however, for there was game to be had among the mountains, and he had
frequently before had to depend upon his rifle for the needs of life.
Choosing a sheltered nook, he piled together a few dried branches and
made a blazing fire, at which his companions might warm themselves, for
they were now nearly five thousand feet above the sea level, and the air
was bitter and keen. Having tethered the horses, and bade Lucy adieu,
he threw his gun over his shoulder, and set out in search of whatever
chance might throw in his way. Looking back he saw the old man and the
young girl crouching over the blazing fire, while the three animals
stood motionless in the back-ground. Then the intervening rocks hid them
from his view.

He walked for a couple of miles through one ravine after another without
success, though from the marks upon the bark of the trees, and other
indications, he judged that there were numerous bears in the vicinity.
At last, after two or three hours fruitless search, he was thinking of
turning back in despair, when casting his eyes upwards he saw a sight
which sent a thrill of pleasure through his heart. On the edge of a
jutting pinnacle, three or four hundred feet above him, there stood a
creature somewhat resembling a sheep in appearance, but armed with a
pair of gigantic horns. The big-horn--for so it is called--was acting,
probably, as a guardian over a flock which were invisible to the hunter;
but fortunately it was heading in the opposite direction, and had not
perceived him. Lying on his face, he rested his rifle upon a rock, and
took a long and steady aim before drawing the trigger. The animal sprang
into the air, tottered for a moment upon the edge of the precipice, and
then came crashing down into the valley beneath.

The creature was too unwieldy to lift, so the hunter contented himself
with cutting away one haunch and part of the flank. With this trophy
over his shoulder, he hastened to retrace his steps, for the evening was
already drawing in. He had hardly started, however, before he realized
the difficulty which faced him. In his eagerness he had wandered far
past the ravines which were known to him, and it was no easy matter
to pick out the path which he had taken. The valley in which he found
himself divided and sub-divided into many gorges, which were so like
each other that it was impossible to distinguish one from the other.
He followed one for a mile or more until he came to a mountain torrent
which he was sure that he had never seen before. Convinced that he had
taken the wrong turn, he tried another, but with the same result. Night
was coming on rapidly, and it was almost dark before he at last found
himself in a defile which was familiar to him. Even then it was no easy
matter to keep to the right track, for the moon had not yet risen, and
the high cliffs on either side made the obscurity more profound. Weighed
down with his burden, and weary from his exertions, he stumbled along,
keeping up his heart by the reflection that every step brought him
nearer to Lucy, and that he carried with him enough to ensure them food
for the remainder of their journey.

He had now come to the mouth of the very defile in which he had left
them. Even in the darkness he could recognize the outline of the cliffs
which bounded it. They must, he reflected, be awaiting him anxiously,
for he had been absent nearly five hours. In the gladness of his heart
he put his hands to his mouth and made the glen re-echo to a loud halloo
as a signal that he was coming. He paused and listened for an answer.
None came save his own cry, which clattered up the dreary silent
ravines, and was borne back to his ears in countless repetitions. Again
he shouted, even louder than before, and again no whisper came back from
the friends whom he had left such a short time ago. A vague, nameless
dread came over him, and he hurried onwards frantically, dropping the
precious food in his agitation.

When he turned the corner, he came full in sight of the spot where the
fire had been lit. There was still a glowing pile of wood ashes there,
but it had evidently not been tended since his departure. The same
dead silence still reigned all round. With his fears all changed to
convictions, he hurried on. There was no living creature near the
remains of the fire: animals, man, maiden, all were gone. It was only
too clear that some sudden and terrible disaster had occurred during
his absence--a disaster which had embraced them all, and yet had left no
traces behind it.

Bewildered and stunned by this blow, Jefferson Hope felt his head spin
round, and had to lean upon his rifle to save himself from falling. He
was essentially a man of action, however, and speedily recovered from
his temporary impotence. Seizing a half-consumed piece of wood from the
smouldering fire, he blew it into a flame, and proceeded with its help
to examine the little camp. The ground was all stamped down by the feet
of horses, showing that a large party of mounted men had overtaken
the fugitives, and the direction of their tracks proved that they had
afterwards turned back to Salt Lake City. Had they carried back both of
his companions with them? Jefferson Hope had almost persuaded himself
that they must have done so, when his eye fell upon an object which made
every nerve of his body tingle within him. A little way on one side of
the camp was a low-lying heap of reddish soil, which had assuredly
not been there before. There was no mistaking it for anything but a
newly-dug grave. As the young hunter approached it, he perceived that a
stick had been planted on it, with a sheet of paper stuck in the cleft
fork of it. The inscription upon the paper was brief, but to the point:

                        JOHN FERRIER,
                 FORMERLY OF SALT LAKE CITY, [22]
                    Died August 4th, 1860.

The sturdy old man, whom he had left so short a time before, was gone,
then, and this was all his epitaph. Jefferson Hope looked wildly round
to see if there was a second grave, but there was no sign of one. Lucy
had been carried back by their terrible pursuers to fulfil her original
destiny, by becoming one of the harem of the Elders son. As the young
fellow realized the certainty of her fate, and his own powerlessness to
prevent it, he wished that he, too, was lying with the old farmer in his
last silent resting-place.

Again, however, his active spirit shook off the lethargy which springs
from despair. If there was nothing else left to him, he could at least
devote his life to revenge. With indomitable patience and perseverance,
Jefferson Hope possessed also a power of sustained vindictiveness, which
he may have learned from the Indians amongst whom he had lived. As he
stood by the desolate fire, he felt that the only one thing which could
assuage his grief would be thorough and complete retribution, brought
by his own hand upon his enemies. His strong will and untiring energy
should, he determined, be devoted to that one end. With a grim, white
face, he retraced his steps to where he had dropped the food, and having
stirred up the smouldering fire, he cooked enough to last him for a
few days. This he made up into a bundle, and, tired as he was, he
set himself to walk back through the mountains upon the track of the
avenging angels.

For five days he toiled footsore and weary through the defiles which he
had already traversed on horseback. At night he flung himself down among
the rocks, and snatched a few hours of sleep; but before daybreak he was
always well on his way. On the sixth day, he reached the Eagle Caon,
from which they had commenced their ill-fated flight. Thence he could
look down upon the home of the saints. Worn and exhausted, he leaned
upon his rifle and shook his gaunt hand fiercely at the silent
widespread city beneath him. As he looked at it, he observed that
there were flags in some of the principal streets, and other signs of
festivity. He was still speculating as to what this might mean when he
heard the clatter of horses hoofs, and saw a mounted man riding towards
him. As he approached, he recognized him as a Mormon named Cowper, to
whom he had rendered services at different times. He therefore accosted
him when he got up to him, with the object of finding out what Lucy
Ferriers fate had been.

I am Jefferson Hope, he said. You remember me.

The Mormon looked at him with undisguised astonishment--indeed, it was
difficult to recognize in this tattered, unkempt wanderer, with ghastly
white face and fierce, wild eyes, the spruce young hunter of former
days. Having, however, at last, satisfied himself as to his identity,
the mans surprise changed to consternation.

You are mad to come here, he cried. It is as much as my own life is
worth to be seen talking with you. There is a warrant against you from
the Holy Four for assisting the Ferriers away.

I dont fear them, or their warrant, Hope said, earnestly. You must
know something of this matter, Cowper. I conjure you by everything you
hold dear to answer a few questions. We have always been friends. For
Gods sake, dont refuse to answer me.

What is it? the Mormon asked uneasily. Be quick. The very rocks have
ears and the trees eyes.

What has become of Lucy Ferrier?

She was married yesterday to young Drebber. Hold up, man, hold up, you
have no life left in you.

Dont mind me, said Hope faintly. He was white to the very lips, and
had sunk down on the stone against which he had been leaning. Married,
you say?

Married yesterday--thats what those flags are for on the Endowment
House. There was some words between young Drebber and young Stangerson
as to which was to have her. Theyd both been in the party that followed
them, and Stangerson had shot her father, which seemed to give him the
best claim; but when they argued it out in council, Drebbers party was
the stronger, so the Prophet gave her over to him. No one wont have
her very long though, for I saw death in her face yesterday. She is more
like a ghost than a woman. Are you off, then?

Yes, I am off, said Jefferson Hope, who had risen from his seat. His
face might have been chiselled out of marble, so hard and set was its
expression, while its eyes glowed with a baleful light.

Where are you going?

Never mind, he answered; and, slinging his weapon over his shoulder,
strode off down the gorge and so away into the heart of the mountains to
the haunts of the wild beasts. Amongst them all there was none so fierce
and so dangerous as himself.

The prediction of the Mormon was only too well fulfilled. Whether it was
the terrible death of her father or the effects of the hateful marriage
into which she had been forced, poor Lucy never held up her head again,
but pined away and died within a month. Her sottish husband, who had
married her principally for the sake of John Ferriers property, did not
affect any great grief at his bereavement; but his other wives mourned
over her, and sat up with her the night before the burial, as is the
Mormon custom. They were grouped round the bier in the early hours of
the morning, when, to their inexpressible fear and astonishment,
the door was flung open, and a savage-looking, weather-beaten man in
tattered garments strode into the room. Without a glance or a word to
the cowering women, he walked up to the white silent figure which had
once contained the pure soul of Lucy Ferrier. Stooping over her, he
pressed his lips reverently to her cold forehead, and then, snatching
up her hand, he took the wedding-ring from her finger. She shall not be
buried in that, he cried with a fierce snarl, and before an alarm could
be raised sprang down the stairs and was gone. So strange and so brief
was the episode, that the watchers might have found it hard to believe
it themselves or persuade other people of it, had it not been for the
undeniable fact that the circlet of gold which marked her as having been
a bride had disappeared.

For some months Jefferson Hope lingered among the mountains, leading
a strange wild life, and nursing in his heart the fierce desire for
vengeance which possessed him. Tales were told in the City of the weird
figure which was seen prowling about the suburbs, and which haunted
the lonely mountain gorges. Once a bullet whistled through Stangersons
window and flattened itself upon the wall within a foot of him. On
another occasion, as Drebber passed under a cliff a great boulder
crashed down on him, and he only escaped a terrible death by throwing
himself upon his face. The two young Mormons were not long in
discovering the reason of these attempts upon their lives, and led
repeated expeditions into the mountains in the hope of capturing or
killing their enemy, but always without success. Then they adopted the
precaution of never going out alone or after nightfall, and of having
their houses guarded. After a time they were able to relax these
measures, for nothing was either heard or seen of their opponent, and
they hoped that time had cooled his vindictiveness.

Far from doing so, it had, if anything, augmented it. The hunters mind
was of a hard, unyielding nature, and the predominant idea of revenge
had taken such complete possession of it that there was no room for
any other emotion. He was, however, above all things practical. He soon
realized that even his iron constitution could not stand the incessant
strain which he was putting upon it. Exposure and want of wholesome food
were wearing him out. If he died like a dog among the mountains, what
was to become of his revenge then? And yet such a death was sure to
overtake him if he persisted. He felt that that was to play his enemys
game, so he reluctantly returned to the old Nevada mines, there to
recruit his health and to amass money enough to allow him to pursue his
object without privation.

His intention had been to be absent a year at the most, but a
combination of unforeseen circumstances prevented his leaving the mines
for nearly five. At the end of that time, however, his memory of
his wrongs and his craving for revenge were quite as keen as on that
memorable night when he had stood by John Ferriers grave. Disguised,
and under an assumed name, he returned to Salt Lake City, careless
what became of his own life, as long as he obtained what he knew to
be justice. There he found evil tidings awaiting him. There had been a
schism among the Chosen People a few months before, some of the younger
members of the Church having rebelled against the authority of the
Elders, and the result had been the secession of a certain number of the
malcontents, who had left Utah and become Gentiles. Among these had been
Drebber and Stangerson; and no one knew whither they had gone. Rumour
reported that Drebber had managed to convert a large part of his
property into money, and that he had departed a wealthy man, while his
companion, Stangerson, was comparatively poor. There was no clue at all,
however, as to their whereabouts.

Many a man, however vindictive, would have abandoned all thought of
revenge in the face of such a difficulty, but Jefferson Hope never
faltered for a moment. With the small competence he possessed, eked out
by such employment as he could pick up, he travelled from town to town
through the United States in quest of his enemies. Year passed into
year, his black hair turned grizzled, but still he wandered on, a human
bloodhound, with his mind wholly set upon the one object upon which he
had devoted his life. At last his perseverance was rewarded. It was
but a glance of a face in a window, but that one glance told him that
Cleveland in Ohio possessed the men whom he was in pursuit of. He
returned to his miserable lodgings with his plan of vengeance all
arranged. It chanced, however, that Drebber, looking from his window,
had recognized the vagrant in the street, and had read murder in
his eyes. He hurried before a justice of the peace, accompanied by
Stangerson, who had become his private secretary, and represented to him
that they were in danger of their lives from the jealousy and hatred of
an old rival. That evening Jefferson Hope was taken into custody, and
not being able to find sureties, was detained for some weeks. When at
last he was liberated, it was only to find that Drebbers house was
deserted, and that he and his secretary had departed for Europe.

Again the avenger had been foiled, and again his concentrated hatred
urged him to continue the pursuit. Funds were wanting, however, and
for some time he had to return to work, saving every dollar for his
approaching journey. At last, having collected enough to keep life in
him, he departed for Europe, and tracked his enemies from city to
city, working his way in any menial capacity, but never overtaking the
fugitives. When he reached St. Petersburg they had departed for Paris;
and when he followed them there he learned that they had just set off
for Copenhagen. At the Danish capital he was again a few days late, for
they had journeyed on to London, where he at last succeeded in running
them to earth. As to what occurred there, we cannot do better than quote
the old hunters own account, as duly recorded in Dr. Watsons Journal,
to which we are already under such obligations.




CHAPTER VI. A CONTINUATION OF THE REMINISCENCES OF JOHN WATSON, M.D.


OUR prisoners furious resistance did not apparently indicate any
ferocity in his disposition towards ourselves, for on finding himself
powerless, he smiled in an affable manner, and expressed his hopes that
he had not hurt any of us in the scuffle. I guess youre going to take
me to the police-station, he remarked to Sherlock Holmes. My cabs at
the door. If youll loose my legs Ill walk down to it. Im not so light
to lift as I used to be.

Gregson and Lestrade exchanged glances as if they thought this
proposition rather a bold one; but Holmes at once took the prisoner at
his word, and loosened the towel which we had bound round his ancles.
[23] He rose and stretched his legs, as though to assure himself that
they were free once more. I remember that I thought to myself, as I eyed
him, that I had seldom seen a more powerfully built man; and his dark
sunburned face bore an expression of determination and energy which was
as formidable as his personal strength.

If theres a vacant place for a chief of the police, I reckon you
are the man for it, he said, gazing with undisguised admiration at my
fellow-lodger. The way you kept on my trail was a caution.

You had better come with me, said Holmes to the two detectives.

I can drive you, said Lestrade.

Good! and Gregson can come inside with me. You too, Doctor, you have
taken an interest in the case and may as well stick to us.

I assented gladly, and we all descended together. Our prisoner made no
attempt at escape, but stepped calmly into the cab which had been his,
and we followed him. Lestrade mounted the box, whipped up the horse, and
brought us in a very short time to our destination. We were ushered into
a small chamber where a police Inspector noted down our prisoners name
and the names of the men with whose murder he had been charged. The
official was a white-faced unemotional man, who went through his
duties in a dull mechanical way. The prisoner will be put before the
magistrates in the course of the week, he said; in the mean time, Mr.
Jefferson Hope, have you anything that you wish to say? I must warn you
that your words will be taken down, and may be used against you.

Ive got a good deal to say, our prisoner said slowly. I want to tell
you gentlemen all about it.

Hadnt you better reserve that for your trial? asked the Inspector.

I may never be tried, he answered. You neednt look startled. It
isnt suicide I am thinking of. Are you a Doctor? He turned his fierce
dark eyes upon me as he asked this last question.

Yes; I am, I answered.

Then put your hand here, he said, with a smile, motioning with his
manacled wrists towards his chest.

I did so; and became at once conscious of an extraordinary throbbing and
commotion which was going on inside. The walls of his chest seemed to
thrill and quiver as a frail building would do inside when some powerful
engine was at work. In the silence of the room I could hear a dull
humming and buzzing noise which proceeded from the same source.

Why, I cried, you have an aortic aneurism!

Thats what they call it, he said, placidly. I went to a Doctor last
week about it, and he told me that it is bound to burst before many days
passed. It has been getting worse for years. I got it from over-exposure
and under-feeding among the Salt Lake Mountains. Ive done my work now,
and I dont care how soon I go, but I should like to leave some account
of the business behind me. I dont want to be remembered as a common
cut-throat.

The Inspector and the two detectives had a hurried discussion as to the
advisability of allowing him to tell his story.

Do you consider, Doctor, that there is immediate danger? the former
asked, [24]

Most certainly there is, I answered.

In that case it is clearly our duty, in the interests of justice, to
take his statement, said the Inspector. You are at liberty, sir, to
give your account, which I again warn you will be taken down.

Ill sit down, with your leave, the prisoner said, suiting the action
to the word. This aneurism of mine makes me easily tired, and the
tussle we had half an hour ago has not mended matters. Im on the brink
of the grave, and I am not likely to lie to you. Every word I say is the
absolute truth, and how you use it is a matter of no consequence to me.

With these words, Jefferson Hope leaned back in his chair and began
the following remarkable statement. He spoke in a calm and methodical
manner, as though the events which he narrated were commonplace enough.
I can vouch for the accuracy of the subjoined account, for I have had
access to Lestrades note-book, in which the prisoners words were taken
down exactly as they were uttered.

It dont much matter to you why I hated these men, he said; its
enough that they were guilty of the death of two human beings--a father
and a daughter--and that they had, therefore, forfeited their own
lives. After the lapse of time that has passed since their crime, it was
impossible for me to secure a conviction against them in any court. I
knew of their guilt though, and I determined that I should be judge,
jury, and executioner all rolled into one. Youd have done the same, if
you have any manhood in you, if you had been in my place.

That girl that I spoke of was to have married me twenty years ago. She
was forced into marrying that same Drebber, and broke her heart over
it. I took the marriage ring from her dead finger, and I vowed that his
dying eyes should rest upon that very ring, and that his last thoughts
should be of the crime for which he was punished. I have carried
it about with me, and have followed him and his accomplice over two
continents until I caught them. They thought to tire me out, but they
could not do it. If I die to-morrow, as is likely enough, I die knowing
that my work in this world is done, and well done. They have perished,
and by my hand. There is nothing left for me to hope for, or to desire.

They were rich and I was poor, so that it was no easy matter for me to
follow them. When I got to London my pocket was about empty, and I found
that I must turn my hand to something for my living. Driving and riding
are as natural to me as walking, so I applied at a cabowners office,
and soon got employment. I was to bring a certain sum a week to the
owner, and whatever was over that I might keep for myself. There was
seldom much over, but I managed to scrape along somehow. The hardest job
was to learn my way about, for I reckon that of all the mazes that ever
were contrived, this city is the most confusing. I had a map beside me
though, and when once I had spotted the principal hotels and stations, I
got on pretty well.

It was some time before I found out where my two gentlemen were living;
but I inquired and inquired until at last I dropped across them. They
were at a boarding-house at Camberwell, over on the other side of the
river. When once I found them out I knew that I had them at my mercy. I
had grown my beard, and there was no chance of their recognizing me.
I would dog them and follow them until I saw my opportunity. I was
determined that they should not escape me again.

They were very near doing it for all that. Go where they would about
London, I was always at their heels. Sometimes I followed them on my
cab, and sometimes on foot, but the former was the best, for then they
could not get away from me. It was only early in the morning or late
at night that I could earn anything, so that I began to get behind hand
with my employer. I did not mind that, however, as long as I could lay
my hand upon the men I wanted.

They were very cunning, though. They must have thought that there was
some chance of their being followed, for they would never go out alone,
and never after nightfall. During two weeks I drove behind them every
day, and never once saw them separate. Drebber himself was drunk half
the time, but Stangerson was not to be caught napping. I watched them
late and early, but never saw the ghost of a chance; but I was not
discouraged, for something told me that the hour had almost come. My
only fear was that this thing in my chest might burst a little too soon
and leave my work undone.

At last, one evening I was driving up and down Torquay Terrace, as the
street was called in which they boarded, when I saw a cab drive up to
their door. Presently some luggage was brought out, and after a time
Drebber and Stangerson followed it, and drove off. I whipped up my horse
and kept within sight of them, feeling very ill at ease, for I feared
that they were going to shift their quarters. At Euston Station they
got out, and I left a boy to hold my horse, and followed them on to the
platform. I heard them ask for the Liverpool train, and the guard answer
that one had just gone and there would not be another for some hours.
Stangerson seemed to be put out at that, but Drebber was rather pleased
than otherwise. I got so close to them in the bustle that I could hear
every word that passed between them. Drebber said that he had a little
business of his own to do, and that if the other would wait for him he
would soon rejoin him. His companion remonstrated with him, and reminded
him that they had resolved to stick together. Drebber answered that the
matter was a delicate one, and that he must go alone. I could not catch
what Stangerson said to that, but the other burst out swearing, and
reminded him that he was nothing more than his paid servant, and that he
must not presume to dictate to him. On that the Secretary gave it up
as a bad job, and simply bargained with him that if he missed the last
train he should rejoin him at Hallidays Private Hotel; to which Drebber
answered that he would be back on the platform before eleven, and made
his way out of the station.

The moment for which I had waited so long had at last come. I had my
enemies within my power. Together they could protect each other,
but singly they were at my mercy. I did not act, however, with undue
precipitation. My plans were already formed. There is no satisfaction in
vengeance unless the offender has time to realize who it is that strikes
him, and why retribution has come upon him. I had my plans arranged by
which I should have the opportunity of making the man who had wronged me
understand that his old sin had found him out. It chanced that some days
before a gentleman who had been engaged in looking over some houses in
the Brixton Road had dropped the key of one of them in my carriage. It
was claimed that same evening, and returned; but in the interval I had
taken a moulding of it, and had a duplicate constructed. By means of
this I had access to at least one spot in this great city where I could
rely upon being free from interruption. How to get Drebber to that house
was the difficult problem which I had now to solve.

He walked down the road and went into one or two liquor shops, staying
for nearly half-an-hour in the last of them. When he came out he
staggered in his walk, and was evidently pretty well on. There was a
hansom just in front of me, and he hailed it. I followed it so close
that the nose of my horse was within a yard of his driver the whole way.
We rattled across Waterloo Bridge and through miles of streets, until,
to my astonishment, we found ourselves back in the Terrace in which he
had boarded. I could not imagine what his intention was in returning
there; but I went on and pulled up my cab a hundred yards or so from
the house. He entered it, and his hansom drove away. Give me a glass of
water, if you please. My mouth gets dry with the talking.

I handed him the glass, and he drank it down.

Thats better, he said. Well, I waited for a quarter of an hour, or
more, when suddenly there came a noise like people struggling inside the
house. Next moment the door was flung open and two men appeared, one of
whom was Drebber, and the other was a young chap whom I had never seen
before. This fellow had Drebber by the collar, and when they came to
the head of the steps he gave him a shove and a kick which sent him half
across the road. You hound, he cried, shaking his stick at him; Ill
teach you to insult an honest girl! He was so hot that I think he would
have thrashed Drebber with his cudgel, only that the cur staggered away
down the road as fast as his legs would carry him. He ran as far as the
corner, and then, seeing my cab, he hailed me and jumped in. Drive me
to Hallidays Private Hotel, said he.

When I had him fairly inside my cab, my heart jumped so with joy that
I feared lest at this last moment my aneurism might go wrong. I drove
along slowly, weighing in my own mind what it was best to do. I might
take him right out into the country, and there in some deserted lane
have my last interview with him. I had almost decided upon this, when he
solved the problem for me. The craze for drink had seized him again, and
he ordered me to pull up outside a gin palace. He went in, leaving word
that I should wait for him. There he remained until closing time, and
when he came out he was so far gone that I knew the game was in my own
hands.

Dont imagine that I intended to kill him in cold blood. It would only
have been rigid justice if I had done so, but I could not bring myself
to do it. I had long determined that he should have a show for his life
if he chose to take advantage of it. Among the many billets which I
have filled in America during my wandering life, I was once janitor and
sweeper out of the laboratory at York College. One day the professor was
lecturing on poisions, [25] and he showed his students some alkaloid,
as he called it, which he had extracted from some South American arrow
poison, and which was so powerful that the least grain meant instant
death. I spotted the bottle in which this preparation was kept, and when
they were all gone, I helped myself to a little of it. I was a fairly
good dispenser, so I worked this alkaloid into small, soluble pills, and
each pill I put in a box with a similar pill made without the poison.
I determined at the time that when I had my chance, my gentlemen should
each have a draw out of one of these boxes, while I ate the pill that
remained. It would be quite as deadly, and a good deal less noisy than
firing across a handkerchief. From that day I had always my pill boxes
about with me, and the time had now come when I was to use them.

It was nearer one than twelve, and a wild, bleak night, blowing hard
and raining in torrents. Dismal as it was outside, I was glad within--so
glad that I could have shouted out from pure exultation. If any of you
gentlemen have ever pined for a thing, and longed for it during twenty
long years, and then suddenly found it within your reach, you would
understand my feelings. I lit a cigar, and puffed at it to steady my
nerves, but my hands were trembling, and my temples throbbing with
excitement. As I drove, I could see old John Ferrier and sweet Lucy
looking at me out of the darkness and smiling at me, just as plain as I
see you all in this room. All the way they were ahead of me, one on each
side of the horse until I pulled up at the house in the Brixton Road.

There was not a soul to be seen, nor a sound to be heard, except the
dripping of the rain. When I looked in at the window, I found Drebber
all huddled together in a drunken sleep. I shook him by the arm, Its
time to get out, I said.

All right, cabby, said he.

I suppose he thought we had come to the hotel that he had mentioned,
for he got out without another word, and followed me down the garden.
I had to walk beside him to keep him steady, for he was still a little
top-heavy. When we came to the door, I opened it, and led him into the
front room. I give you my word that all the way, the father and the
daughter were walking in front of us.

Its infernally dark, said he, stamping about.

Well soon have a light, I said, striking a match and putting it to
a wax candle which I had brought with me. Now, Enoch Drebber, I
continued, turning to him, and holding the light to my own face, who am
I?

He gazed at me with bleared, drunken eyes for a moment, and then I
saw a horror spring up in them, and convulse his whole features, which
showed me that he knew me. He staggered back with a livid face, and I
saw the perspiration break out upon his brow, while his teeth chattered
in his head. At the sight, I leaned my back against the door and laughed
loud and long. I had always known that vengeance would be sweet, but I
had never hoped for the contentment of soul which now possessed me.

You dog! I said; I have hunted you from Salt Lake City to St.
Petersburg, and you have always escaped me. Now, at last your wanderings
have come to an end, for either you or I shall never see to-morrows sun
rise. He shrunk still further away as I spoke, and I could see on his
face that he thought I was mad. So I was for the time. The pulses in my
temples beat like sledge-hammers, and I believe I would have had a fit
of some sort if the blood had not gushed from my nose and relieved me.

What do you think of Lucy Ferrier now? I cried, locking the door, and
shaking the key in his face. Punishment has been slow in coming, but it
has overtaken you at last. I saw his coward lips tremble as I spoke. He
would have begged for his life, but he knew well that it was useless.

Would you murder me? he stammered.

There is no murder, I answered. Who talks of murdering a mad dog?
What mercy had you upon my poor darling, when you dragged her from her
slaughtered father, and bore her away to your accursed and shameless
harem.

It was not I who killed her father, he cried.

But it was you who broke her innocent heart, I shrieked, thrusting
the box before him. Let the high God judge between us. Choose and
eat. There is death in one and life in the other. I shall take what you
leave. Let us see if there is justice upon the earth, or if we are ruled
by chance.

He cowered away with wild cries and prayers for mercy, but I drew my
knife and held it to his throat until he had obeyed me. Then I swallowed
the other, and we stood facing one another in silence for a minute or
more, waiting to see which was to live and which was to die. Shall I
ever forget the look which came over his face when the first warning
pangs told him that the poison was in his system? I laughed as I saw
it, and held Lucys marriage ring in front of his eyes. It was but for
a moment, for the action of the alkaloid is rapid. A spasm of pain
contorted his features; he threw his hands out in front of him,
staggered, and then, with a hoarse cry, fell heavily upon the floor. I
turned him over with my foot, and placed my hand upon his heart. There
was no movement. He was dead!

The blood had been streaming from my nose, but I had taken no notice of
it. I dont know what it was that put it into my head to write upon the
wall with it. Perhaps it was some mischievous idea of setting the police
upon a wrong track, for I felt light-hearted and cheerful. I remembered
a German being found in New York with RACHE written up above him, and it
was argued at the time in the newspapers that the secret societies must
have done it. I guessed that what puzzled the New Yorkers would puzzle
the Londoners, so I dipped my finger in my own blood and printed it on
a convenient place on the wall. Then I walked down to my cab and found
that there was nobody about, and that the night was still very wild. I
had driven some distance when I put my hand into the pocket in which
I usually kept Lucys ring, and found that it was not there. I was
thunderstruck at this, for it was the only memento that I had of her.
Thinking that I might have dropped it when I stooped over Drebbers
body, I drove back, and leaving my cab in a side street, I went boldly
up to the house--for I was ready to dare anything rather than lose
the ring. When I arrived there, I walked right into the arms of a
police-officer who was coming out, and only managed to disarm his
suspicions by pretending to be hopelessly drunk.

That was how Enoch Drebber came to his end. All I had to do then was
to do as much for Stangerson, and so pay off John Ferriers debt. I knew
that he was staying at Hallidays Private Hotel, and I hung about all
day, but he never came out. [26] fancy that he suspected something when
Drebber failed to put in an appearance. He was cunning, was Stangerson,
and always on his guard. If he thought he could keep me off by staying
indoors he was very much mistaken. I soon found out which was the window
of his bedroom, and early next morning I took advantage of some ladders
which were lying in the lane behind the hotel, and so made my way into
his room in the grey of the dawn. I woke him up and told him that the
hour had come when he was to answer for the life he had taken so long
before. I described Drebbers death to him, and I gave him the same
choice of the poisoned pills. Instead of grasping at the chance of
safety which that offered him, he sprang from his bed and flew at my
throat. In self-defence I stabbed him to the heart. It would have been
the same in any case, for Providence would never have allowed his guilty
hand to pick out anything but the poison.

I have little more to say, and its as well, for I am about done up.
I went on cabbing it for a day or so, intending to keep at it until I
could save enough to take me back to America. I was standing in the
yard when a ragged youngster asked if there was a cabby there called
Jefferson Hope, and said that his cab was wanted by a gentleman at 221B,
Baker Street. I went round, suspecting no harm, and the next thing I
knew, this young man here had the bracelets on my wrists, and as neatly
snackled [27] as ever I saw in my life. Thats the whole of my story,
gentlemen. You may consider me to be a murderer; but I hold that I am
just as much an officer of justice as you are.

So thrilling had the mans narrative been, and his manner was so
impressive that we had sat silent and absorbed. Even the professional
detectives, _blas_ as they were in every detail of crime, appeared to
be keenly interested in the mans story. When he finished we sat for
some minutes in a stillness which was only broken by the scratching
of Lestrades pencil as he gave the finishing touches to his shorthand
account.

There is only one point on which I should like a little more
information, Sherlock Holmes said at last. Who was your accomplice who
came for the ring which I advertised?

The prisoner winked at my friend jocosely. I can tell my own secrets,
 he said, but I dont get other people into trouble. I saw your
advertisement, and I thought it might be a plant, or it might be the
ring which I wanted. My friend volunteered to go and see. I think youll
own he did it smartly.

Not a doubt of that, said Holmes heartily.

Now, gentlemen, the Inspector remarked gravely, the forms of the law
must be complied with. On Thursday the prisoner will be brought before
the magistrates, and your attendance will be required. Until then I will
be responsible for him. He rang the bell as he spoke, and Jefferson
Hope was led off by a couple of warders, while my friend and I made our
way out of the Station and took a cab back to Baker Street.




CHAPTER VII. THE CONCLUSION.


WE had all been warned to appear before the magistrates upon the
Thursday; but when the Thursday came there was no occasion for our
testimony. A higher Judge had taken the matter in hand, and Jefferson
Hope had been summoned before a tribunal where strict justice would
be meted out to him. On the very night after his capture the aneurism
burst, and he was found in the morning stretched upon the floor of the
cell, with a placid smile upon his face, as though he had been able
in his dying moments to look back upon a useful life, and on work well
done.

Gregson and Lestrade will be wild about his death, Holmes remarked, as
we chatted it over next evening. Where will their grand advertisement
be now?

I dont see that they had very much to do with his capture, I
answered.

What you do in this world is a matter of no consequence, returned my
companion, bitterly. The question is, what can you make people believe
that you have done. Never mind, he continued, more brightly, after a
pause. I would not have missed the investigation for anything. There
has been no better case within my recollection. Simple as it was, there
were several most instructive points about it.

Simple! I ejaculated.

Well, really, it can hardly be described as otherwise, said Sherlock
Holmes, smiling at my surprise. The proof of its intrinsic simplicity
is, that without any help save a few very ordinary deductions I was able
to lay my hand upon the criminal within three days.

That is true, said I.

I have already explained to you that what is out of the common is
usually a guide rather than a hindrance. In solving a problem of this
sort, the grand thing is to be able to reason backwards. That is a very
useful accomplishment, and a very easy one, but people do not practise
it much. In the every-day affairs of life it is more useful to reason
forwards, and so the other comes to be neglected. There are fifty who
can reason synthetically for one who can reason analytically.

I confess, said I, that I do not quite follow you.

I hardly expected that you would. Let me see if I can make it clearer.
Most people, if you describe a train of events to them, will tell you
what the result would be. They can put those events together in their
minds, and argue from them that something will come to pass. There are
few people, however, who, if you told them a result, would be able to
evolve from their own inner consciousness what the steps were which led
up to that result. This power is what I mean when I talk of reasoning
backwards, or analytically.

I understand, said I.

Now this was a case in which you were given the result and had to
find everything else for yourself. Now let me endeavour to show you the
different steps in my reasoning. To begin at the beginning. I approached
the house, as you know, on foot, and with my mind entirely free from all
impressions. I naturally began by examining the roadway, and there, as I
have already explained to you, I saw clearly the marks of a cab, which,
I ascertained by inquiry, must have been there during the night. I
satisfied myself that it was a cab and not a private carriage by the
narrow gauge of the wheels. The ordinary London growler is considerably
less wide than a gentlemans brougham.

This was the first point gained. I then walked slowly down the garden
path, which happened to be composed of a clay soil, peculiarly suitable
for taking impressions. No doubt it appeared to you to be a mere
trampled line of slush, but to my trained eyes every mark upon its
surface had a meaning. There is no branch of detective science which
is so important and so much neglected as the art of tracing footsteps.
Happily, I have always laid great stress upon it, and much practice
has made it second nature to me. I saw the heavy footmarks of the
constables, but I saw also the track of the two men who had first passed
through the garden. It was easy to tell that they had been before the
others, because in places their marks had been entirely obliterated by
the others coming upon the top of them. In this way my second link was
formed, which told me that the nocturnal visitors were two in number,
one remarkable for his height (as I calculated from the length of his
stride), and the other fashionably dressed, to judge from the small and
elegant impression left by his boots.

On entering the house this last inference was confirmed. My well-booted
man lay before me. The tall one, then, had done the murder, if murder
there was. There was no wound upon the dead mans person, but the
agitated expression upon his face assured me that he had foreseen his
fate before it came upon him. Men who die from heart disease, or any
sudden natural cause, never by any chance exhibit agitation upon their
features. Having sniffed the dead mans lips I detected a slightly sour
smell, and I came to the conclusion that he had had poison forced upon
him. Again, I argued that it had been forced upon him from the hatred
and fear expressed upon his face. By the method of exclusion, I had
arrived at this result, for no other hypothesis would meet the facts.
Do not imagine that it was a very unheard of idea. The forcible
administration of poison is by no means a new thing in criminal annals.
The cases of Dolsky in Odessa, and of Leturier in Montpellier, will
occur at once to any toxicologist.

And now came the great question as to the reason why. Robbery had not
been the object of the murder, for nothing was taken. Was it politics,
then, or was it a woman? That was the question which confronted me.
I was inclined from the first to the latter supposition. Political
assassins are only too glad to do their work and to fly. This murder
had, on the contrary, been done most deliberately, and the perpetrator
had left his tracks all over the room, showing that he had been there
all the time. It must have been a private wrong, and not a political
one, which called for such a methodical revenge. When the inscription
was discovered upon the wall I was more inclined than ever to my
opinion. The thing was too evidently a blind. When the ring was found,
however, it settled the question. Clearly the murderer had used it to
remind his victim of some dead or absent woman. It was at this point
that I asked Gregson whether he had enquired in his telegram to
Cleveland as to any particular point in Mr. Drebbers former career. He
answered, you remember, in the negative.

I then proceeded to make a careful examination of the room, which
confirmed me in my opinion as to the murderers height, and furnished me
with the additional details as to the Trichinopoly cigar and the length
of his nails. I had already come to the conclusion, since there were no
signs of a struggle, that the blood which covered the floor had burst
from the murderers nose in his excitement. I could perceive that the
track of blood coincided with the track of his feet. It is seldom that
any man, unless he is very full-blooded, breaks out in this way through
emotion, so I hazarded the opinion that the criminal was probably a
robust and ruddy-faced man. Events proved that I had judged correctly.

Having left the house, I proceeded to do what Gregson had neglected. I
telegraphed to the head of the police at Cleveland, limiting my enquiry
to the circumstances connected with the marriage of Enoch Drebber. The
answer was conclusive. It told me that Drebber had already applied for
the protection of the law against an old rival in love, named Jefferson
Hope, and that this same Hope was at present in Europe. I knew now that
I held the clue to the mystery in my hand, and all that remained was to
secure the murderer.

I had already determined in my own mind that the man who had walked
into the house with Drebber, was none other than the man who had driven
the cab. The marks in the road showed me that the horse had wandered
on in a way which would have been impossible had there been anyone in
charge of it. Where, then, could the driver be, unless he were inside
the house? Again, it is absurd to suppose that any sane man would carry
out a deliberate crime under the very eyes, as it were, of a third
person, who was sure to betray him. Lastly, supposing one man wished
to dog another through London, what better means could he adopt than
to turn cabdriver. All these considerations led me to the irresistible
conclusion that Jefferson Hope was to be found among the jarveys of the
Metropolis.

If he had been one there was no reason to believe that he had ceased to
be. On the contrary, from his point of view, any sudden change would be
likely to draw attention to himself. He would, probably, for a time at
least, continue to perform his duties. There was no reason to suppose
that he was going under an assumed name. Why should he change his name
in a country where no one knew his original one? I therefore organized
my Street Arab detective corps, and sent them systematically to every
cab proprietor in London until they ferreted out the man that I wanted.
How well they succeeded, and how quickly I took advantage of it, are
still fresh in your recollection. The murder of Stangerson was an
incident which was entirely unexpected, but which could hardly in
any case have been prevented. Through it, as you know, I came into
possession of the pills, the existence of which I had already surmised.
You see the whole thing is a chain of logical sequences without a break
or flaw.

It is wonderful! I cried. Your merits should be publicly recognized.
You should publish an account of the case. If you wont, I will for
you.

You may do what you like, Doctor, he answered. See here! he
continued, handing a paper over to me, look at this!

It was the _Echo_ for the day, and the paragraph to which he pointed was
devoted to the case in question.

The public, it said, have lost a sensational treat through the sudden
death of the man Hope, who was suspected of the murder of Mr. Enoch
Drebber and of Mr. Joseph Stangerson. The details of the case will
probably be never known now, though we are informed upon good authority
that the crime was the result of an old standing and romantic feud, in
which love and Mormonism bore a part. It seems that both the victims
belonged, in their younger days, to the Latter Day Saints, and Hope, the
deceased prisoner, hails also from Salt Lake City. If the case has had
no other effect, it, at least, brings out in the most striking manner
the efficiency of our detective police force, and will serve as a lesson
to all foreigners that they will do wisely to settle their feuds at
home, and not to carry them on to British soil. It is an open secret
that the credit of this smart capture belongs entirely to the well-known
Scotland Yard officials, Messrs. Lestrade and Gregson. The man was
apprehended, it appears, in the rooms of a certain Mr. Sherlock Holmes,
who has himself, as an amateur, shown some talent in the detective
line, and who, with such instructors, may hope in time to attain to some
degree of their skill. It is expected that a testimonial of some sort
will be presented to the two officers as a fitting recognition of their
services.

Didnt I tell you so when we started? cried Sherlock Holmes with a
laugh. Thats the result of all our Study in Scarlet: to get them a
testimonial!

Never mind, I answered, I have all the facts in my journal, and the
public shall know them. In the meantime you must make yourself contented
by the consciousness of success, like the Roman miser--

            Populus me sibilat, at mihi plaudo
       Ipse domi simul ac nummos contemplor in arca.





ORIGINAL TRANSCRIBERS NOTES:


[Footnote 1: Frontispiece, with the caption: He examined with his glass
the word upon the wall, going over every letter of it with the most
minute exactness. (_Page_ 23.)]

[Footnote 2: JOHN H. WATSON, M.D.: the initial letters in the name are
capitalized, the other letters in small caps. All chapter titles are in
small caps. The initial words of chapters are in small caps with first
letter capitalized.]

[Footnote 3: lodgings.: the period should be a comma, as in later
editions.]

[Footnote 4: hoemoglobin: should be haemoglobin. The o&e are
concatenated.]

[Footnote 5: 221B: the B is in small caps]

[Footnote 6: THE LAURISTON GARDEN MYSTERY: the table-of-contents
lists this chapter as ...GARDENS MYSTERY--plural, and probably more
correct.]

[Footnote 7: brought.": the text has an extra double-quote mark]

[Footnote 8: individual--: illustration this page, with the
caption: As he spoke, his nimble fingers were flying here, there, and
everywhere.]

[Footnote 9: manoeuvres: the o&e are concatenated.]

[Footnote 10: Patent leathers: the hyphen is missing.]

[Footnote 11: condonment: should be condonement.]

[Footnote 13: wages.: ending quote is missing.]

[Footnote 14: the first.: ending quote is missing.]

[Footnote 15: make much of...: Other editions complete this sentence
with an it. But there is a gap in the text at this point, and, given
the context, it may have actually been an interjection, a dash. The gap
is just the right size for the characters it. and the start of a new
sentence, or for a ----]

[Footnote 16: tho cushion: tho should be the]

[Footnote 19: shoving: later editions have showing. The original is
clearly superior.]

[Footnote 20: stared about...: illustration, with the caption: One of
them seized the little girl, and hoisted her upon his shoulder.]

[Footnote 21: upon the: illustration, with the caption: As he watched
it he saw it writhe along the ground.]

[Footnote 22: FORMERLY...: F,S,L,C in caps, other letters in this line
in small caps.]

[Footnote 23: ancles: ankles.]

[Footnote 24: asked,: should be asked.]

[Footnote 25: poisions: should be poisons]

[Footnote 26: ...fancy: should be I fancy. There is a gap in the
text.]

[Footnote 27: snackled: shackled in later texts.]

[Footnote 29: Heber C. Kemball, in one of his sermons, alludes to his
hundred wives under this endearing epithet.]
</article>
<article name="Die Biene Maja und ihre Abenteuer">
    +Die Biene Maja und ihre Abenteuer+




  Von diesem Buch ist eine Sonderausgabe erschienen, die auf bestem,
  holzfreien Hadernpapier gedruckt, in Halbleder gebunden und mit
  einem Bild des Verfassers nach einer Radierung von K. Wilczynski
  versehen ist. Sie ist einmalig, in der Anzahl beschrnkt und durch
  alle Buchhandlungen sowohl wie durch den Verlag direkt zu beziehen.
  Druck der Spamerschen Buchdruckerei in Leipzig.




  +Waldemar Bonsels+

  +Die Biene Maja+
  und ihre Abenteuer


  121. bis 130. Auflage


  1919
  Schuster & Loeffler, Berlin und Leipzig




  +Die russische Ausgabe+
  bei G. Sabsowitsch, Verlag, Moskau

  +Die englische Ausgabe+
  bei Ch. E. J. Kidd, Lenares

  +Die dnische Ausgabe+
  bei E. Jespersen, Verlag, Kopenhagen

  +Die schwedische Ausgabe+
  bei C. W. K. Gleerup, Verlag, Lund

  +Die finnische Ausgabe+
  bei Werner Sderstrm Osakeyhti Porvoo, Suomi

  +Die hollndische Ausgabe+
  im Verlag Patria, Amersfort


  Copyright 1912 by Schuster & Loeffler, Berlin
  Spamersche Buchdruckerei in Leipzig




  +Kapitelfolge+

                                                           Seite
     I. Kapitel: Majas Flucht aus der Heimatstadt              9
    II. Kapitel: Peppis Rosenhaus                             18
   III. Kapitel: Der Waldsee und seine Leute                  27
    IV. Kapitel: Iffi und Kurt                                41
     V. Kapitel: Der Grashpfer                               54
    VI. Kapitel: Puck                                         63
   VII. Kapitel: Majas Gefangenschaft bei der Spinne          74
  VIII. Kapitel: Die Wanze und der Schmetterling              88
    IX. Kapitel: Hannibals Kampf mit dem Menschen             94
     X. Kapitel: Die Wunder der Nacht                        110
    XI. Kapitel: Die Elfenfahrt                              125
   XII. Kapitel: Der Dichter Alois Siebenpunkt               132
  XIII. Kapitel: Die Ruberburg                              139
   XIV. Kapitel: Die Flucht                                  146
    XV. Kapitel: Die Heimkehr                                154
   XVI. Kapitel: Die Schlacht der Bienen und Hornissen       162
  XVII. Kapitel: Die Freundin der Knigin                    173




Erstes Kapitel

+Majas Flucht aus der Heimatstadt+


Die ltere Bienendame, die der kleinen Biene Maja behilflich war, als
sie zum Leben erwachte und aus ihrer Zelle schlpfte, hie Kassandra und
hatte groes Ansehen im Stock. Es waren damals sehr aufgeregte Tage,
weil im Volk der Bienen eine Emprung ausgebrochen war, die die Knigin
nicht unterdrcken konnte.

Whrend die erfahrene Kassandra der kleinen Maja, deren Erlebnisse ich
erzhlen werde, die groen blanken Augen trocknete und ihr die zarten
Flgel etwas in Ordnung zu bringen suchte, brummte der groe Bienenstock
bedrohlich, und die kleine Maja fand es sehr warm und sagte es ihrer
Begleiterin.

Kassandra sah sich besorgt um, aber sie antwortete der Kleinen nicht
gleich. Sie wunderte sich darber, da das Kind schon so frh etwas
auszusetzen fand, aber im Grunde war es richtig, die Wrme und das
Gedrnge waren beinahe unertrglich. Maja sah ununterbrochen Biene auf
Biene an sich vorbereilen, das Geschiebe und die Eile waren so gro,
da zuweilen die eine ber die andere fortkletterte und wieder andere
sich wie zu Klumpen geballt vorberwlzten.

Einmal war die Knigin in ihrer Nhe gewesen. Kassandra und Maja wurden
etwas beiseitegedrngt, aber eine Drohne, ein freundlicher junger
Bienenherr von gepflegtem Aussehen, war ihnen behilflich. Er nickte Maja
zu und strich sich etwas erregt mit dem Vorderbein, das bei den Bienen
als Arm und Hand gebraucht wird, ber seine glnzenden Brusthaare.

Das Unheil wird hereinbrechen, sagte er zu Kassandra. Der Schwarm der
Revolutionre wird die Stadt verlassen. Sie haben schon eine neue
Knigin ausgerufen.

Kassandra beachtete ihn fast gar nicht. Sie hatte sich nicht einmal fr
die Hilfe bedankt, und Maja empfand deutlich, da die alte Dame recht
unfreundlich gegen den jungen Herrn war. Sie wagte nicht recht zu
fragen, die Eindrcke kamen alle so rasch hintereinander und drohten sie
zu berwltigen. Die Erregung teilte sich ihr mit, und sie begann ein
feines helles Summen.

Was fllt dir ein, sagte Kassandra. Ist nicht schon Lrm genug?

Maja war sofort still und richtete ihre Augen fragend auf ihre ltere
Freundin.

Komm hierher, sagte diese zu Maja, wir wollen versuchen, uns hier
etwas zu sammeln.

Sie schob Maja bei ihrem schnen glnzenden Flgel, der noch weich und
ganz neu und wundervoll durchsichtig war, in eine wenig besuchte Ecke
vor ein paar Wabenschrnke, die mit Honig gefllt waren.

Maja blieb stehn und hielt sich an einem der Schrnke fest.

Hier riecht es ausgezeichnet, sagte sie zu Kassandra.

Die Alte wurde wieder ganz nervs:

Du mut warten lernen, antwortete sie. Kind, ich habe in diesem
Frhling schon viele hundert junge Bienen erzogen und fr ihre erste
Ausfahrt unterrichtet, aber mir ist noch keine vorgekommen, die so
naseweis gewesen wre. Du scheinst eine Ausnahmenatur zu sein.

Maja errtete und fuhr mit den beiden zarten Fingerchen ihrer Hand in
den Mund:

Was ist das? fragte sie schchtern, eine Ausnahmenatur.

O, das ist etwas durchaus Unschickliches, rief Kassandra, die
allerdings die Handbewegung der kleinen Biene meinte und ihre Frage
nicht beachtet hatte. Jetzt merke genau auf alles, was ich dir sage,
denn ich kann dir nur kurze Zeit widmen, es sind schon wieder neue Junge
ausgeschlpft und meine einzige Gehilfin in dieser Etage, Turka, ist
ohnehin aufs uerste berarbeitet und klagte in den letzten Tagen ber
Ohrensausen. Setz dich hier.

Maja gehorchte und schaute mit ihren groen braunen Augen auf ihre
Lehrerin.

Die erste Regel, die eine junge Biene sich merken mu, sagte Kassandra
und seufzte, ist, da jede in allem, was sie denkt und tut, den anderen
gleichen und an das Wohlergehn aller denken mu. Es ist bei der
Staatsordnung, die wir seit undenkbar langer Zeit als die richtige
erkannt haben und die sich auch aufs beste bewhrt hat, die einzige
Grundlage fr das Wohl des Staates. Morgen wirst du ausfliegen. Eine
ltere Gefhrtin wird dich begleiten. Du darfst zuerst nur kleine
Strecken fliegen und mut dir die Gegenstnde genau merken, an denen du
vorberkommst, damit du immer zurckfliegen kannst. Deine Begleiterin
wird dir die hundert Blumen und Blten beibringen, die den besten Honig
haben, die mut du auswendig lernen, das bleibt keiner Biene erspart.
Die erste Zeile kannst du dir gleich merken: Heidekraut und
Lindenblte. Sag es nach.

Das kann ich nicht, sagte die kleine Maja, das ist furchtbar schwer.
Ich werde es ja spter auch schon sehn.

Die alte Kassandra ri die Augen auf und schttelte den Kopf.

Mit dir wird es schlecht hinausgehn, seufzte sie, das sehe ich schon
jetzt.

Soll ich denn spter den ganzen Tag Honig sammeln? fragte die kleine
Maja.

Kassandra seufzte tief und sah die kleine Biene einen Augenblick ernst
und traurig an. Es erschien, als erinnerte sie sich ihres eigenen
Lebens, das von Anfang bis zu Ende voll Mhe und Arbeit gewesen war. Und
dann sagte sie mit vernderter Stimme und sah Maja liebreich an:

Meine kleine Maja, du wirst den Sonnenschein kennenlernen, hohe grne
Bume und blhende Wiesen voller Blumen, Silberseen und schnelle
glitzernde Bche, den strahlenden blauen Himmel, und zuletzt vielleicht
sogar den Menschen, der das Hchste und Vollkommenste ist, was die Natur
hervorgebracht hat. ber allen diesen Herrlichkeiten wird dir deine
Arbeit zur Freude werden. Sieh, dies alles steht dir ja noch bevor, mein
Herzelein, du hast Grund, glcklich zu sein.

Gut, sagte die kleine Maja, das will ich denn auch.

Kassandra lchelte gtig. Sie wute nicht recht, woher es kam, aber sie
hatte pltzlich eine ganz besondere Liebe zur kleinen Maja gefat, wie
sie sich kaum erinnerte jemals fr eine andere junge Biene gefhlt zu
haben. Und so mag es denn wohl gekommen sein, da sie der kleinen Maja
mehr sagte und erzhlte, als fr gewhnlich die Bienen an ihrem ersten
Lebenstag hren. Sie gab ihr vielerlei besondere Ratschlge, warnte sie
vor den Gefahren der argen Welt drauen und nannte ihr die
gefhrlichsten Feinde, die das Volk der Bienen hat. Endlich sprach sie
auch lange von den Menschen und legte in das Herz der keinen Biene die
erste Liebe zu ihnen und den Keim einer groen Sehnsucht, sie
kennenzulernen.

Sei hflich und gefllig gegen alle Insekten, die dir begegnen, sagte
sie zum Schlu, dann wirst du mehr von ihnen lernen, als ich dir heute
sagen kann, aber hte dich vor den Hornissen und Wespen. Die Hornissen
sind unsere mchtigsten und bsesten Feinde, und die Wespen sind ein
unntzes Rubergeschlecht ohne Heimat und Glauben. Wir sind strker und
mchtiger als sie, aber sie stehlen und morden, wo sie knnen. Du kannst
deinen Stachel gegen alle Insekten brauchen, um dir Achtung zu
verschaffen und um dich zu verteidigen, aber wenn du ein warmbltiges
Tier stichst oder gar einen Menschen, so mut du sterben, weil dein
Stachel in ihrer Haut hngenbleibt und zerbricht. Steche solche Wesen
nur im Falle der hchsten Not, aber dann tu es mutig und frchte den Tod
nicht, denn wir Bienen verdanken unser groes Ansehen und die Achtung,
die wir berall genieen, unserem Mut und unserer Klugheit. Und nun leb
wohl, kleine Maja, hab Glck in der Welt und sei deinem Volk und deiner
Knigin treu.

Die kleine Biene nickte und erwiderte den Ku und die Umarmung ihrer
alten Lehrerin. Sie legte sich mit heimlicher Freude und Erregung zum
Schlaf nieder und konnte vor Neugierde kaum einschlummern, denn mit dem
kommenden Tag sollte sie die groe weite Welt kennenlernen, die Sonne,
den Himmel und die Blumen.


In der Bienenstadt war es inzwischen ruhig geworden. Ein groer Teil der
jngeren Bienen hatte das Reich verlassen, um einen neuen Staat zu
begrnden. Lange hrte man den groen Schwarm im Sonnenschein brausen.
Es war nicht aus bermut oder bser Gesinnung gegen die Knigin
geschehn, sondern das Volk hatte sich so stark vermehrt, da die Stadt
nicht mehr Raum genug fr alle Bewohner bot und da unmglich so viel
Honigvorrte eingebracht werden konnten, da alle ber den Winter ihr
Auskommen hatten. Denn ein groer Teil des Honigs, der im Sommer
gesammelt wurde, mute an den Menschen abgetreten werden. Das waren alte
Staatsvertrge, dafr sicherten die Menschen das Wohlergehn der Stadt,
sorgten fr Ruhe und Sicherheit und im Winter fr Schutz gegen die
Klte.

Am anderen Morgen hrte Maja an ihrem Lager den frhlichen Ruf:

Die Sonne ist aufgegangen!

Sofort sprang sie empor und schlo sich einer Honigtrgerin an.

Gut, sagte diese freundlich, du kannst mit mir fliegen.

Am Tor hielten die Wchter sie an. Es war ein rechtes Gedrnge. Einer
der Torhter sagte der kleinen Maja das Losungswort ihres Volkes, ohne
das keine Biene in die Stadt gelassen wird.

Merk es dir, sagte er, und viel Glck auf deinen ersten Weg.

Als die kleine Biene vor das Stadttor trat, mute sie die Augen
schlieen vor der Flle von Licht, die ihr entgegenstrmte. Es war ein
Leuchten von Gold und Grn, so ber alles reich und warm und strahlend,
da sie vor Seligkeit nicht wute, was sie tun oder sagen sollte.

Das ist aber wirklich groartig, sagte sie zu ihrer Begleiterin.
Fliegt man da hinein?!

Nur zu! sagte die andere.

Da hob die kleine Maja ihr Kpfchen, bewegte ihre schnen neuen Flgel
und empfand pltzlich, da das Flugbrett, auf dem sie sa, zu versinken
schien. Und zugleich war ihr, als glitte das Land unter ihr fort, nach
hinten hin fort, und als kmen die groen grnen Kuppeln vor ihr auf sie
zu.

Ihre Augen glnzten, ihr Herz jubelte.

Ich fliege, rief sie, das kann nur Fliegen sein, was ich tue! Das ist
aber in der Tat etwas ganz Ausgezeichnetes.

Ja, du fliegst, sagte die Honigtrgerin, die Mhe hatte, an Majas
Seite zu bleiben. Das sind die Linden, auf die wir zufliegen, unsere
Schlolinden, daran kannst du dir die Lage unserer Stadt merken. Aber du
fliegst wirklich sehr schnell, Maja.

Das kann man gar nicht rasch genug, sagte Maja. O, wie duftet der
Sonnenschein!

Nein, sagte die Trgerin, die etwas auer Atem war, das sind die
Blten. Aber nun fliege langsamer, sonst bleibe ich zurck, und du
kannst dir auch auf diese Art die Gegend nicht fr den Rckweg merken.

Aber die kleine Maja hrte nicht. Sie war wie in einem Rausch von
Freude, Sonne und Daseinsglck. Ihr war, als glitte sie pfeilgeschwind
durch ein grnleuchtendes Meer von Licht, einer immer greren
Herrlichkeit entgegen. Die bunten Blumen schienen sie zu rufen, die
stillen beschienenen Fernen lockten sie und der blaue Himmel segnete
ihren jauchzenden Jugendflug. So schn wird es nie mehr, wie es heute
ist, dachte sie, ich kann nicht umkehren, ich kann an nichts denken, als
an die Sonne.

Unter ihr wechselten die bunten Bilder, langsam und breit zog das
friedliche Land im Licht dahin. Die ganze Sonne mu aus Gold sein,
dachte die kleine Biene.

Als sie ber einem groen Garten angelangt war, der in lauter blhenden
Wolken von Kirschbumen, Rotdorn und Flieder zu ruhn schien, lie sie
sich zu Tode erschpft nieder. Sie fiel in ein Beet von roten Tulpen und
hielt sich an einer der groen Blten fest, prete sich an die
Blumenwand, atmete tief und beseligt und sah ber den schimmernden
Lichtrndern der Blume den strahlend blauen Himmel.

O, wie tausendmal schner ist es in der groen Welt drauen, rief sie,
als in der dunklen Bienenstadt. Niemals werde ich nach dort
zurckkehren, um Honig zu tragen oder Wachs zu bereiten. O nein, niemals
werde ich das tun. Ich will die blhende Welt sehen und kennenlernen,
ich bin nicht, wie die andern Bienen sind, mein Herz ist fr Freude und
berraschungen, fr Erlebnisse und Abenteuer bestimmt. Ich will keine
Gefahren frchten, habe ich nicht Kraft und Mut und einen Stachel?

Sie lachte vor bermut und Freude und nahm einen tiefen Schluck
Honigsaft aus dem Kelch der Tulpe.

Groartig, dachte sie, es ist wirklich herrlich, zu leben.

Ach, wenn die kleine Maja geahnt htte, wie vielerlei an Gefahren und
Not ihrer wartete, htte sie sich sicherlich besonnen. Aber sie ahnte es
nicht und blieb bei ihrem Vorsatz. Ihre Mdigkeit berwltigte sie bald,
und sie schlief ein. Als sie erwachte, war die Sonne fort, und das Land
lag in Dmmerung. Ihr Herz schlug doch ein wenig, und sie verlie
zgernd die Blume, die im Begriff war, sich fr die Nacht zu schlieen.
Unter einem groen Blatt, hoch im Wipfel eines alten Baums, versteckte
sie sich, und im Einschlafen dachte sie zuversichtlich:

Ich will nicht gleich am Anfang den Mut verlieren. Die Sonne kommt
wieder, das ist bestimmt, Kassandra hat es gesagt, man mu nur fest und
ruhig schlafen.




Zweites Kapitel

+Peppis Rosenhaus+


Als die kleine Maja erwachte, war es schon hell geworden. Sie fror ein
wenig unter ihrem groen grnen Blatt, und die ersten Bewegungen, die
sie machte, gelangen ihr nur schwerfllig und langsam. Sie hielt sich an
einem derchen des Blattes fest und lie ihre Flgel zittern und
flimmern, damit sie geschmeidig und frei von Staub werden mchten. Dann
glttete sie ihre blonden Haare und wischte sich die groen Augen blank.
Vorsichtig kroch sie etwas weiter, bis an den Rand des Blattes, und
schaute sich um.

Sie war ganz geblendet von der Pracht und dem Glanz der Morgensonne
umher. Die Bltter leuchteten wie grnes Gold hoch ber ihr, da wo sie
selbst sa, war es noch khl im Schatten.

O du herrliche Welt, dachte die kleine Biene.

Nur langsam entsann sie sich aller Erlebnisse des vergangenen Tags,
aller Gefahren und aller Schnheiten, die sie gesehn hatte. Aber sie
blieb entschlossen, nicht in den Stock zurckzukehren. Freilich, wenn
sie an Kassandra dachte, klopfte ihr Herz. Aber es war ja unmglich, da
Kassandra sie jemals finden wrde. Nein, es war nun einmal ihre Freude
nicht, immer ein und ausfliegen zu mssen, Honig zu tragen oder Wachs
zu bereiten. Sie wollte glcklich und frei sein und das Leben auf ihre
Art genieen, mochte kommen was wollte, sie wrde es ertragen. So
leichtsinnig dachte Maja, jedenfalls auch deshalb, weil sie keine rechte
Vorstellung von allem hatte, was ihrer noch wartete.

Irgendwo fern in der Sonne schimmerte es rot. Maja sah es glnzen und
leuchten, und eine heimliche Ungeduld befiel sie. Sie versprte auch,
da sie hungrig war. Da schwang sie sich mutig mit einem hellen frohen
Summen aus ihrem Versteck, weit hinein in die helle flimmernde Luft und
in den warmen Sonnenschein. Sie steuerte in ruhigem Flug grade auf das
rote Blumenlicht zu, das ihr zu winken schien, und als sie in die Nhe
kam, sprte sie den Hauch eines so sen Duftes, da sie beinahe betubt
wurde und die groe rote Blume nur mit Mhe erreichte. Sie schwang sich
auf das uerste, gewlbte Blumenblatt und hielt sich fest. Da rollte
ihr, mit der leisen Bewegung, in die das Blatt geraten war, eine
funkelnde silberne Kugel entgegen, fast so gro wie sie selbst,
durchsichtig und flimmernd in allen Farben des Regenbogens. Maja
erschrak furchtbar, obgleich die Pracht dieser khlen Silberkugel sie
entzckte. Der durchsichtige Ball rollte vorber, neigte sich ber den
Rand des Blattes, sprang in den Sonnenschein und fiel nieder ins Gras.

Maja stie einen leisen Ruf des Schreckens aus, als sie sah, da die
schne Kugel unten in viele winzige Perlchen zersprungen war. Aber es
flimmerte nun im Gras so belebt und frisch, rann in zitternden Trpflein
an den Halmen nieder und funkelte, wie Diamanten im Lampenlicht blitzen.
Maja hatte erkannt, da es ein groer Wassertropfen gewesen war, der
sich im Kelch der Blume in der feuchten Nacht gebildet hatte.

Als sie sich dem Kelch wieder zuwandte, sah sie einen Kfer mit braunen
Flgeldecken und einem schwarzen Brustschild am Eingang zum Blumenkelch
sitzen. Er war etwas kleiner als sie, behauptete seinen Platz ruhig und
sah sie ernst, aber durchaus nicht unfreundlich an.

Maja begrte ihn hflich.

Gehrte die Kugel Ihnen? fragte sie. Und als der Kfer nicht
antwortete, fgte sie hinzu. Es tut mir sehr leid, sie hinabgeworfen zu
haben.

Meinen Sie den Tautropfen? fragte der Kfer und lchelte etwas
berlegen. Deswegen brauchen Sie sich keine Sorge zu machen. Ich hatte
bereits getrunken, und meine Frau trinkt niemals Wasser, weil sie mit
den Nieren zu tun hat. Was wollen Sie hier?

Was ist dies fr eine herrliche Blume? sagte Maja, ohne auf seine
Frage zu antworten. Wrden Sie so gtig sein, mich zu unterrichten, wie
sie heit?

Sie erinnerte sich der Ratschlge Kassandras und war so hflich als
mglich.

Der Kfer bewegte seinen blanken glnzenden Kopf im Rckenschild. Dies
lie sich leicht und angenehm bewerkstelligen, da er ganz prchtig
hineinpate und lautlos hin und her glitt.

Sie sind wohl erst von gestern? fragte er und lachte, nicht grade
hflich, ber Majas Unkenntnis. berhaupt hatte er etwas, was Maja als
unfein auffiel, die Bienen waren gebildeter und wuten sich besser zu
benehmen. Aber gutmtig schien der Kfer doch zu sein, denn als er sah,
wie Majas Wangen sich mit einer feinen Rte der Verlegenheit berzogen,
wurde er nachsichtiger gegen ihre Unwissenheit.

Es ist eine Rose, sagte er, damit Sie es denn also nun wissen. Wir
haben sie vor vier Tagen bezogen und sie ist inzwischen unter unsrer
Pflege auf das prchtigste gediehen. Darf ich Sie bitten nher zu
treten?

Maja zgerte, aber sie berwand ihre Besorgnis und machte ein paar
Schritte. Der Kfer drckte ein helles Blttchen beiseite, und sie
betraten nebeneinander die schmalen Gemcher mit ihren hellroten,
duftenden Wnden und ihrem gedmpften Licht.

Sie haben es wirklich reizend, sagte Maja, die ehrlich entzckt war.
Und dieser Duft hat etwas gradezu Betrendes.

Dem Kfer machte es Freude, da Maja Gefallen an seiner Wohnsttte fand.

Man mu wissen, wo man sich aufhlt, sagte er und lchelte
wohlwollend. Sage mir, wo du umgehst, und ich werde dir sagen, wieviel
du wert bist, sagt ein altes Sprichwort. Ist etwas Honig gefllig?

Ach, platzte Maja heraus, das wre mir wirklich sehr angenehm.

Der Kfer nickte und verschwand hinter einer der Wnde. Maja sah sich
glcklich um. Sie schmiegte ihre Wange und ihre Hndchen an die zarten
rotleuchtenden Vorhnge, atmete den kstlichen Duft tief ein und war
beseligt vor Freude, sich in einer so schnen Wohnung aufhalten zu
drfen. Es ist doch wirklich ein groer Genu zu leben, dachte sie, und
diese Behausung ist den dumpfen und berfllten Etagen nicht zu
vergleichen, in denen wir leben und arbeiten. Schon diese Stille ist
ganz herrlich.

Da hrte sie den Kfer hinter den Wnden in ein lautes Schelten
ausbrechen. Er brummte erregt und bse, und es war Maja, als packte er
jemanden, den er unsanft vor sich herstie. Dazwischen vernahm sie ein
helles Stimmchen voll Angst und Verdru und sie verstand die Worte:

Natrlich, wenn ich allein bin, drfen Sie sich herausnehmen, mir zu
nahe zu treten; aber warten Sie, wie es Ihnen ergehn wird, wenn ich
meine Gefhrten hole. Sie sind ein Grobian. Gut, ich gehe. Aber Sie
werden die Bezeichnung, die ich Ihnen gegeben habe, niemals vergessen.

Maja war sehr erschrocken ber die eindringliche Stimme des Fremden, die
scharf und bse klang. Sie hrte dann noch, wie jemand sich eilig
entfernte.

Der Kfer kam zurck und warf mrrisch ein Klmpchen Honig hin.

Es ist ein Skandal, sagte er, nirgends hat man Ruhe vor diesem
Gesindel.

Maja verga vor Hunger zu danken, sie nahm rasch einen Mund voll und
kaute, whrend der Kfer sich den Schwei von der Stirn trocknete und
seinen oberen Brustring etwas lockerte, um leichter atmen zu knnen.

Wer war denn da? fragte Maja mit vollem Mund.

Essen Sie bitte erst den Mund leer, schlucken Sie erst herunter, sagte
der Kfer, so versteht man Sie nicht.

Maja gehorchte, aber der erregte Hausbesitzer lie ihr keine Zeit zu
einer neuen Frage. rgerlich fuhr er heraus:

Eine Ameise war es. Glauben denn diese Leute, man sparte und sorgte
sich Stunde fr Stunde nur fr sie. Und so ohne Gru und Anstand in die
Vorratskammern zu dringen! Es emprt mich. Wenn ich nicht wte, da es
bei diesen Tieren in der Tat Mangel an Lebensart ist, wrde ich keinen
Augenblick anstehen, sie als Diebe zu kennzeichnen. -- Er besann sich
pltzlich und wandte sich Maja zu:

Sie verzeihen, ich verga mich Ihnen vorzustellen, ich heie Peppi, von
der Familie der Rosenkfer.

Ich heie Maja, sagte die kleine Biene schchtern, es freut mich
sehr, Sie kennengelernt zu haben. Sie betrachtete den Kfer Peppi
genau. Er verbeugte sich wiederholt und breitete dabei seine Fhler wie
zwei kleine braune Fcher aus. Das gefiel Maja auerordentlich.

Sie haben entzckende Fhler, sagte sie, einfach s ...

Nun ja, meinte Peppi geschmeichelt, darauf hlt man. Wollen Sie auch
die Rckseite sehn?

Wenn ich bitten darf, sagte Maja.

Der Kfer drehte die gefcherten Fhler zur Seite und lie einen
Sonnenstrahl darber gleiten.

Famos, nicht? fragte er.

Ich htte so was nicht fr mglich gehalten, entgegnete Maja. Meine
eigenen Fhler sind sehr unscheinbar.

Nun ja, meinte Peppi, jedem das Seine. Dafr haben Sie zweifellos
schne Augen und die goldene Frbung Ihres Krpers hat viel fr sich.

Die kleine Maja strahlte vor Glck. Es hatte ihr noch niemand gesagt,
da etwas an ihr schn sei. Sie wurde ganz bermtig vor Lebensfreude
und nahm rasch noch ein Klmpchen Honig.

Es ist eine ausgezeichnete Qualitt, sagte sie.

Bitte nehmen Sie nur noch, sagte Peppi, etwas erstaunt ber den
Appetit seines Gastes, es ist Rosenhonig erster Ernte. Man mu sich
etwas in acht nehmen, damit man sich nicht den Magen verdirbt. Es ist
auch noch Tau da, wenn Sie vielleicht Durst verspren.

Vielen Dank, sagte Maja. Ich mchte nun fliegen, wenn Sie erlauben.

Der Kfer lachte.

Fliegen und immer fliegen, sagte er, das liegt euch Bienen im Blut.
Ich begreife diese ruhlose Art nicht recht. Es hat doch viel fr sich,
am Platze zu bleiben, finden Sie nicht?

Ach, ich fliege so gern, sagte die kleine Maja.

Der Kfer ffnete ihr hflich den roten Vorhang.

Ich will Sie noch hinausbegleiten. Ich fhre Sie zu einem
Aussichtsblatt, von dem Sie bequem abfliegen knnen.

O, danke, sagte Maja, ich kann abfliegen, wo ich will.

Das haben Sie vor mir voraus, sagte Peppi, ich habe etwas Mhe mit
der Entfaltung der unteren Flgel.

Er drckte ihr die Hand und schob den letzten Vorhang zur Seite.

O Gott, der blaue Himmel, jubelte Maja, leben Sie wohl.

Auf Wiedersehn, sagte Peppi und blieb eine Weile auf dem hchsten
Rosenblatt sitzen, um der kleinen Maja nachzusehn, die schnell in einer
geraden Linie hoch in den Himmel hinaufflog, in den goldenen
Sonnenschein und in die reine Morgenluft.

Dann seufzte er heimlich auf und zog sich nachdenklich wieder in den
khlen Rosenkelch zurck. Es wurde ihm etwas warm, obgleich es noch frh
war. Er summte sein Morgenlied vor sich hin, das im roten Schein der
Rosenbltter und im warmen Sonnenglanz erklang:

  Alles steht in gold und grn
  warm und sommerlich.
  Nur solang die Rosen blhn,
  ist es schn fr mich.

  Meine Heimat wei ich nicht,
  kstlich ist mir dies:
  da ich so im Rosenlicht
  meinen Tag genie.

  Wenig wei ich von der Welt,
  wo ich glcklich bin.
  Wenn die Rose welkt und fllt,
  mu auch ich dahin.

Und drauen zog langsam der strahlende Frhlingstag ber die blhende
Erde herauf.




Drittes Kapitel

+Der Waldsee und seine Leute+


Ach, dachte die kleine Maja im Dahinfliegen, nun habe ich vergessen,
Peppi nach den Menschen zu fragen. Ein so erfahrener Mann, wie er, htte
mir sicherlich die beste Auskunft geben knnen. Aber vielleicht wrde
sie heute noch selbst einem Menschen begegnen. Voll Unternehmungslust
und Frohsinn lie sie ihre blanken Augen ber das weite bunte Land
schweifen, das sich unter ihr in seiner sommerlichen Pracht ausbreitete.

Sie kam an einem groen Garten vorber, in dem es von tausend Farben
leuchtete. Es begegneten ihr vielerlei Insekten, die ihr Wandergre
zuriefen und frohe Fahrt und gute Ernte wnschten. Jedesmal wenn sie
einer Biene begegnete, schlug anfnglich ihr Herz ein wenig, denn sie
fhlte sich in ihrer Unttigkeit doch etwas schuldig und frchtete sich,
Bekannte zu treffen. Aber sie merkte bald, da die Bienen sich weiter
nicht um sie kmmerten.

Da sah sie pltzlich den blauen Himmel in unendlicher Tiefe unter sich
leuchten. Sie dachte zuerst in groem Schrecken, sie wre vielleicht
viel zu hoch geflogen und htte sich im Himmel verirrt, aber da sah sie,
da sich am Rande dieses unterirdischen Himmels die Bume spiegelten,
und sie erkannte zu ihrem Entzcken, da es ein groes, stilles
Wasserbecken war, das blau und klar im ruhigen Morgen dalag. Sie lie
sich voll Freude bis dicht auf die Oberflche nieder und konnte nun sich
selbst im Spiegelbild im Wasser fliegen sehen, sie sah ihre hellen
Flgel wie reines flimmerndes Glas blinken, gewahrte, da ihre Beinchen
richtig am Krper lagen, wie Kassandra es sie gelehrt hatte, und sah die
schne Goldfarbe ihres Krpers im Wasser scheinen.

Es ist wirklich eine Wonne, so ber eine Wasserflche dahinzufliegen,
jubelte sie. Sie erblickte groe und kleine Fische, die in der hellen
Flut dahinschwammen, oder ganz ruhig darin zu schweben schienen. Maja
htete sich wohl, ihnen zu nahe zu kommen, denn sie wute, da ihr vom
Geschlecht der Fische Gefahr drohte.

Als sie am andern Ufer des Sees anlangte, lockte das warme Schilf sie
und die riesengroen Bltter der Seerosen, die wie grne Teller auf dem
Wasser lagen. Sie whlte eines der verborgensten Bltter, ber dem die
hohen blanken Schilfhalme sich in der Sonne wiegten, und das selbst
beinahe ganz im Schatten lag. Nur ein paar runde Sonnenflecke lagen
darauf, wie Goldmnzen.

Herrlich, sagte die kleine Biene, also wirklich ganz herrlich. Sie
begann sich ein wenig zu subern, indem sie mit beiden Armen hinter
ihren Kopf griff und ihn etwas nach vorn zog, als ob sie ihn abreien
wollte. Aber sie htete sich, zu fest zu ziehn, es handelte sich nur
darum, den Staub zu entfernen. Dann strich sie mit den Hinterbeinchen
ber die Flgeldecken, so da sie sich nach unten bogen und wundervoll
blank wieder in ihre alte Lage zurckschnellten.

Da kam ein kleiner stahlblauer Brummer zu ihr, lie sich neben ihr auf
dem Blatt nieder und schaute sie erstaunt an.

Was wollen Sie hier auf meinem Blatt? fragte er.

Maja erschrak.

Man wird sich doch wohl einen Augenblick ausruhen drfen, sagte sie.
Sie erinnerte sich, da Kassandra ihr mitgeteilt hatte, da das Volk der
Bienen berall in der Insektenwelt in groem Ansehen stehe. Nun wollte
sie einmal eine Probe machen, ob es ihr gelnge, sich in Respekt zu
setzen. Aber ihr Herz klopfte doch etwas, weil sie sehr laut und
entschieden geantwortet hatte.

Der Brummer erschrak in der Tat sichtlich, als er merkte, da Maja nicht
willens war, sich etwas vorschreiben zu lassen. Mit verdrossenem Summen
schwang er sich auf einen Schilfhalm, der sich ber das Blatt neigte,
auf dem Maja sa, und sagte um vieles hflicher von oben herunter aus
dem Sonnenschein:

Sie sollten lieber einiges arbeiten, wie es sich fr Sie gehrt, aber
wenn Sie der Ruhe bedrfen ... immerhin. Ich werde hier warten.

Es sind doch wirklich Bltter genug da, meinte Maja.

Alles vermietet, sagte er. Man ist heutzutage froh, wenn man ein
kleines Grundstck sein eigen nennt. Wre mein Vorgnger nicht vor zwei
Tagen vom Frosch gefangen worden, so htte ich heute noch keine rechte
Unterkunft. Immer bald hier, bald dort zu bernachten, hat viel gegen
sich. Es hat halt nicht jeder ein so geordnetes Staatswesen, wie Sie es
pflegen. brigens mein Name ist Hans Christoph, mit Verlaub mich Ihnen
vorzustellen.

Maja schwieg und dachte mit Schrecken darber nach, wie furchtbar es
sein msse, in die Gewalt des Frosches zu geraten.

Gibt es in diesem Gewsser viele Frsche? fragte sie den Brummer und
setzte sich genau in die Mitte des Blattes, damit man sie vom Wasser aus
nicht erblickte.

Der Brummer lachte.

Geben Sie sich keine Mhe, spottete er, der Frosch kann Sie von unten
sehn, wenn die Sonne leuchtet, weil das Blatt dann durchscheint. Er
sieht ganz genau, wie Sie auf meinem Blatt sitzen.

Maja, die von der bsen Vorstellung befallen wurde, dicht unter ihrem
Blatt se vielleicht ein groer Frosch und schaute sie mit seinen
vorquellenden, hungrigen Augen an, wollte rasch auffliegen, als etwas
ganz Furchtbares geschah, worauf sie in der Tat in keiner Weise
vorbereitet war. Anfangs konnte sie in der ersten Verwirrung nicht genau
unterscheiden, was eigentlich vor sich ging, sie hrte nur ein helles,
klirrendes Sausen ber sich, das so klang, als schwirrte der Wind in
welken Blttern; dazu hrte sie ein singendes Pfeifen, einen hellen
zornigen Jagdruf, und ein feiner, durchsichtiger Schatten huschte ber
ihr Blatt. Und dann erkannte sie, und ihr Herz stand still vor Angst,
da eine groe, schillernde Libelle sich des armen Hans Christophs
bemchtigt hatte und den verzweifelt Schreienden in ihren groen,
messerspitzen Fngen hielt. Sie lie sich mit ihrer Beute auf dem
Schilfhalm nieder, der sich unter ihrer Last etwas niederbeugte, so da
Maja die beiden ber sich schweben sah und zugleich das Spiegelbild im
klaren Wasser. Hans Christophs Geschrei zerri ihr Herz. Ohne Besinnen
rief sie laut:

Lassen Sie sofort den Brummer los, wer immer Sie sein mgen. Sie haben
nicht das geringste Recht, in so eigenmchtiger Weise in die
Gewohnheiten anderer einzugreifen.

Die Libelle lie den Brummer aus ihren Fngen, hielt ihn aber sorgfltig
mit den Armen fest und drehte den Kopf nach Maja um. Maja erschrak sehr
ber die groen ernsten Augen der Libelle und ber die bsen Beizangen,
die sie hatte, aber das Glitzern ihrer Flgel und ihres Leibes entzckte
sie. Es blitzte wie Wasser, Glas und Edelsteine. Nur die ungeheure Gre
der Libelle entsetzte sie, sie begriff ihren Mut nicht mehr und begann
auf das heftigste zu zittern.

Aber die Libelle sagte ganz freundlich:

Kind, was ist denn mit Ihnen?

Lassen Sie ihn los, rief Maja und in ihre Augen kamen Trnen, er
heit Hans Christoph ...

Die Libelle lchelte.

Weshalb denn, Kleine? fragte sie und machte ein interessiertes
Gesicht, das aber einen Ausdruck von groer Herablassung hatte.

Maja stotterte hilflos:

Ach, er ist doch ein so netter, sauberer Herr und hat Ihnen, soviel ich
wei, nichts zuleide getan.

Die Libelle sah Hans Christoph nachdenklich an:

Ja, er ist ein lieber, kleiner Kerl, antwortete sie zrtlich und bi
ihm den Kopf ab.

Maja glaubte die Besinnung zu verlieren, so sehr erschtterte sie dieser
Vorgang. Sie konnte lange kein Wort hervorbringen und mute nun, voll
Grauen, die krachenden und knuspernden Laute hren, unter denen der
Krper des stahlblauen Hans Christoph ber ihr zerlegt wurde.

Stellen Sie sich doch nicht an, sagte die Libelle mit vollem Mund und
kaute weiter, Ihre Empfindsamkeit macht nur geringen Eindruck auf mich.
Machen Sie es denn besser? Augenscheinlich sind Sie noch sehr jung und
haben sich im eigenen Hause nur wenig umgesehn. Wenn im Sommer das
Drohnenmorden in Ihrem Stock beginnt, emprt sich die Umwelt nicht
weniger, und ich meine, mit mehr Recht.

Maja fragte: Sind Sie fertig da oben? Sie konnte sich nicht
entschlieen hinaufzusehen.

Ein Bein ist noch da, sagte die Libelle.

Schlucken Sie es bitte herunter, dann werde ich Ihnen antworten, rief
Maja, die genau wute, weshalb die Drohnen im Sommer im Bienenstock
gettet werden muten, und die sich ber die Dummheit der Libelle
rgerte. Aber unterstehen Sie sich nicht, mir auch nur um einen Schritt
nher zu treten. Ich wrde mich nicht besinnen, unverzglich von meinem
Stachel Gebrauch zu machen.

Die kleine Maja war wirklich sehr rgerlich geworden. Zum erstenmal
erwhnte sie ihren Stachel und zum erstenmal freute sie sich dieser
Waffe.

Die Libelle machte bse Augen. Sie hatte ihre Mahlzeit beendet und sa
nun, etwas geduckt, da, schaute Maja lauernd an und sah aus wie ein
Raubtier, das im Begriff ist, sich auf seine Beute zu strzen. Aber die
kleine Biene blieb nun ganz ruhig. Sie konnte nicht recht begreifen,
woher ihr Mut kam, aber sie empfand keine Furcht mehr. Sie lie ein ganz
feines helles Summen hren, wie sie es einmal im Stock vom Wchter
gehrt hatte, als eine Wespe sich dem Flugloch nherte.

Die Libelle sagte drohend und langsam:

Die Libellen leben in bestem Einvernehmen mit dem Volk der Bienen.

Sie tun auch gut daran, sagte Maja rasch.

Meinen Sie etwa, ich htte Furcht vor Ihnen, ich -- vor Ihnen? fragte
die Libelle. Sie lie mit einem Ruck den Schilfhalm los, der in seine
alte Lage zurckschnellte, und sauste mit einem klirrenden, blitzenden
Flgelschlag bis dicht auf die Oberflche des Wassers nieder. Es sah
ganz herrlich aus, wie sie sich im See spiegelte, man glaubte zwei
Libellen zu sehn, und beide bewegten ihre glsernen Flgel so rasch und
fein, da es aussah, als fliee ein heller Silberschein um sie her. Es
sah so herrlich aus, da die kleine Maja ihren ganzen Verdru um den
armen Hans Christoph und jede Gefahr verga. Sie klatschte in die Hnde
und rief ganz begegeistert:

Wie wunderschn. Wie wunderschn!

Meinen Sie mich? fragte die Libelle ganz erstaunt. Aber dann fgte sie
rasch hinzu: Ja, ich kann mich sehn lassen, das ist wahr. Sie htten
die Begeisterung erleben sollen, in die gestern einige Menschen
gerieten, die mich am Bach sahn, wo sie sich hingelegt hatten.

Menschen? fragte Maja, ach, Menschen haben Sie gesehn?

Natrlich, sagte die Libelle, aber es wird Sie zweifellos auf das
lebhafteste interessieren, wie ich heie, mein Name ist Schnuck, von der
Familie der Netzflgler, im besonderen der Libellen.

Ach, erzhlen Sie von den Menschen, bat Maja, nachdem sie ihren Namen
genannt hatte.

Die Libelle schien vershnt. Sie setzte sich neben Maja auf das Blatt,
und die kleine Biene lie es zu. Sie wute, da Schnuck sich hten
wrde, ihr zu nahe zu treten.

Haben die Menschen einen Stachel? fragte Maja.

Mein Gott, sagte Schnuck, was sollten sie wohl damit anfangen. Nein,
sie haben schlimmere Waffen gegen uns und sie sind uns sehr gefhrlich.
Es gibt niemand, der nicht Angst vor ihnen htte, besonders vor den
kleinen, bei denen man die beiden Beine deutlich unterscheiden kann.
Diese heien Knaben.

Stellen sie Ihnen nach? fragte Maja, ganz atemlos vor Erregung.

Ja, ist Ihnen denn das nicht verstndlich? fragte Schnuck mit einem
Blick ber ihre Flgel. Ich bin nur selten einem Menschen begegnet, der
nicht den Versuch gemacht htte, mich zu greifen.

Weshalb denn nur? fragte Maja ngstlich.

Wir haben eben etwas sehr Anziehendes, sagte Schnuck mit einem
bescheidenen Lcheln und sah schrg vor sich nieder. Einen andern Grund
wei ich nicht. Es ist vorgekommen, da Leute unserer Familie, die sich
haben greifen lassen, die furchtbarsten Qualen und zuletzt den Tod haben
erleiden mssen.

Sind sie aufgefressen worden?

Nein, nein, sagte Schnuck beruhigend, das grade nicht. Soviel bekannt
ist, nhrt sich der Mensch nicht von Libellen. Aber im Menschen leben
zuweilen Mordgelste, die wohl ewig unaufgeklrt bleiben. Es mag Ihnen
unglaublich erscheinen, aber in der Tat sind Flle vorgekommen, in denen
sogenannte Knabenmenschen Libellen gefangen haben und ihnen aus purem
Vergngen die Flgel oder die Beine ausgerissen haben. Sie zweifeln?

Natrlich zweifle ich daran, rief Maja entrstet.

Schnuck zuckte die glitzernden Achseln, ihr Gesicht sah ganz alt aus vor
Erkenntnis.

Ach, wenn man einmal offen sein drfte, sagte sie, ganz bla vor
Traurigkeit, ich hatte einen Bruder, er berechtigte zu den besten
Hoffnungen, nur war er etwas leichtsinnig und leider sehr neugierig. Er
fiel in die Hnde eines Knaben, der ihm unversehens ein Netz berwarf,
das an einer langen Stange befestigt war. Sagen Sie selbst, wer denkt an
so was?

Nein, antwortete die kleine Maja, an so etwas habe ich niemals
gedacht.

Die Libelle sah sie an.

Es ist ihm dann ein schwarzes Seil um die Brust gebunden worden, mitten
zwischen seinen Flgeln, so da er wohl auffliegen, aber niemals
entrinnen konnte. Jedesmal, wenn mein armer Bruder glaubte, seine
Freiheit zurckgewonnen zu haben, sah er sich auf die grausamste Weise
an jenem bereits erwhnten Seil wieder in das Bereich des Knaben
zurckgezerrt.

Maja schttelte nur den Kopf.

Man darf es sich gar nicht vorstellen, flsterte sie traurig.

Wenn ich einmal einen Tag nicht daran gedacht habe, so trume ich
sicher davon, fuhr Schnuck fort. Es kam damals sehr viel zusammen.
Schlielich starb mein Bruder. Schnuck seufzte tief auf.

Woran starb er? fragte Maja in aufrichtiger Teilnahme.

Schnuck konnte nicht gleich antworten, groe Trnen brachen aus ihren
Augen und liefen langsam ber die Wangen:

Er ist in die Tasche gesteckt worden, schluchzte sie, das hlt
niemand aus ...

Was ist das? fragte Maja ngstlich, die kaum in der Lage war, so viel
Neues und Bses auf einmal zu verstehn und zu bewltigen.

Die Tasche, erklrte ihr Schnuck, ist eine Vorratskammer, die die
Menschen in ihrem ueren Fell haben. Aber was glauben Sie, das sonst
noch darin war? O, in welch furchtbarer Gesellschaft mute mein armer
Bruder seine letzten Atemzge tun. Sie werden niemals darauf kommen!

Nein, sagte Maja mit bebendem Atem, ich werde es nicht ... vielleicht
Honig?

Nein, nein, meinte Schnuck, sehr wichtig und sehr traurig zugleich.
Honig werden Sie selten in den Taschen der Menschen finden. Ich will
Ihnen sagen, was darin war: es war ein Frosch, ein Taschenschwert und
eine gelbe Rbe. Nun?

Schaurig, flsterte Maja, was ist ein Taschenschwert?

Es ist gewissermaen der knstliche Stachel des Menschen. Da ihm die
Natur diese Waffe versagt hat, sucht er sie nachzubilden. Der Frosch war
gottlob bereits im Begriff, das Zeitliche zu segnen. Er hatte ein Auge
verloren, ein Bein gebrochen und sein Unterkiefer war ausgerenkt. Aber
sobald mein Bruder in der Tasche erschien, zischte der Frosch aus seinem
schiefen Maul:

Wenn ich genesen bin, werde ich Sie unverzglich verschlingen. Dabei
schielte er mit dem briggebliebenen Auge auf den bedauernswerten
Ankmmling. Dieser Blick mu in der Dmmerung des Gefngnisses auf das
furchtbarste gewirkt haben. Mein Bruder hat die Besinnung verloren, als
er gleich darauf durch eine unerwartete Erschtterung so gegen den
Frosch gepret wurde, da seine Flgel an dem kalten nassen Leib des
Sterbenden kleben blieben. O, man kann keine Worte finden, um dies Elend
in der treffendsten Weise zu kennzeichnen.

Woher wissen Sie das alles? stotterte Maja aufs uerste entsetzt.

Spter warf der Knabe meinen Bruder und den Frosch fort, als er Hunger
bekam und die Rbe suchte, um sie zu verzehren. Ich fand sie
nebeneinander im Gras liegen, angelockt durch die Hilferufe meines
Bruders. Aber ich kam nur noch zeitig genug, um alles zu hren und ihm
die Augen zuzudrcken. Er legte seinen Arm um meinen Hals und kte mich
zum Abschied. Dann starb er tapfer und ohne Klage, als ein kleiner Held.
Als das letzte Beben seiner zerknitterten Flgel aufgehrt hatte, legte
ich Eichbltter ber ihn und suchte ein erblhtes Mnnertreu, dessen
blaue Blume zu seiner Ehre auf dem Hgel verwelken sollte. Leb wohl,
rief ich, schlaf gut, mein kleiner Bruder, und flog in den stillen
Abend hinaus, den beiden roten Sonnen entgegen, denn man sah die Sonne
zweimal, am Abendhimmel und im See. So traurig und feierlich ist noch
niemandem zumut gewesen. -- Ist Ihnen auch schon etwas Trauriges
passiert? Dann erzhlen Sie es mir vielleicht ein andermal.

Nein, sagte Maja, ich bin eigentlich bis jetzt immer froh gewesen.

Da knnen Sie Gott danken, meinte Schnuck, etwas enttuscht.

Maja fragte nach dem Frosch.

Ach so, der, sagte Schnuck. Er erlitt voraussichtlich den Tod, den er
verdiente. Wie konnte er nur die Herzenshrtigkeit aufbringen, einen
Sterbenden zu ngstigen? Er versuchte damals zu entkommen, aber da sein
eines Bein sowohl als auch sein eines Auge vllig auer Ttigkeit
gesetzt waren, hpfte er ununterbrochen im Kreise herum. Es sah
auerordentlich komisch aus. So wird der Storch Sie bald gefunden
haben, rief ich ihm zu, bevor ich davonflog.

Der arme Frosch, sagte die kleine Maja.

Nun, ich mu doch bitten, meinte die Libelle nicht ohne Entrstung,
Sie gehn zu weit. Einen Frosch bedauern, heit sich in den eigenen
Flgel schneiden. Sie sind eine gewissenlose Person, wie mir scheint.

Das kann ja sein, antwortete Maja, aber es wird mir sehr schwer,
jemanden leiden zu sehn.

O, trstete sie Schnuck, das liegt an Ihrer Jugend, Sie werden es
lernen, nur Mut, meine Freundin. Aber ich mu nun fort in die Sonne.
Es ist hier reichlich khl. Leben Sie wohl!

Es klirrte leise, und tausend helle Farben blitzten auf, blasse,
liebliche Farben, wie rinnendes Wasser sie hat und klare Edelsteine.
Schnuck schwang sich durch die grnen Schilfhalme bis auf die Oberflche
des Wassers, und Maja hrte sie in der Morgensonne singen. Sie lauschte
dem feinen Gesang, der etwas von der schwermtigen Sigkeit eines
Volksliedes hatte und das Herz der kleinen Maja frhlich stimmte und
traurig zugleich. Es klang zu ihr herber:

  Lieblich ist der stille Flu,
  wenn der Morgensonne Gru
  seine Flut getroffen.
  Wo der grne Schilfhalm weht
  und die Wasserrose steht,
  wei und gelb und offen.

  Warmer Duft und Wind und Flut,
  auf den Flgeln Sonnenglut
  und im Herzen Freude.
  Ach, das Leben ist nicht lang,
  goldner Sommer, habe Dank,
  herrlich ist es heute.

Horch, das Lied der Libelle erschallt, rief ein weier Schmetterling
seiner Freundin zu. Sie schaukelten sich dicht an Maja vorber durch das
strahlende Blau des schnen Tags. Da hob auch die kleine Biene ihre
Flgel, und mit leisem Summen begrte sie den silbernen See zum
Abschied und flog landeinwrts davon.




Viertes Kapitel

+Iffi und Kurt+


Als die kleine Maja am anderen Morgen im Kelch einer blauen Glockenblume
erwachte, hrte sie, da die Luft von einem feinen leisen Rauschen
erfllt war, und sie sprte, da die Blume sich bewegte, als bekme sie
heimlich kleine Ste. Durch ihren geffneten Kelch zog ein feuchter
Geruch von Gras und Erde, und es war sehr khl.

Maja nahm ngstlich ein wenig Bltenstaub von den gelben Staubgefen
der Blume, machte dann sorgfltig Morgentoilette und wagte sich
vorsichtig Schritt fr Schritt bis an den uersten Rand des hngenden
Kelches. Da sah sie, da es regnete. Ein feiner khler Regen ging mit
leisem Rauschen nieder und bedeckte alles umher mit Millionen heller
Silberperlen. Sie lagen auf den Blttern und Blumen, rollten im Gras die
schmalen grnen Wege der Halme nieder und erfrischten den braunen
Erdboden.

Maja sah mit groem Erstaunen und voll tiefer Verwunderung diese
Vernderung der Welt, es war der erste Regen, den sie in ihrem jungen
Dasein erlebte. Aber obgleich es ihr wohl gefiel und sie beglckte,
stellte sich doch eine leichte Besorgnis bei ihr ein, denn sie erinnerte
sich der Warnung Kassandras, niemals im Regen auszufliegen. Sie begriff,
da es schwer sein mute, die Flgel im Tropfenfall zu bewegen, auch tat
ihr die Klte weh, und sie vermite den ruhigen goldenen Sonnenschein,
der die ganze Erde heiter und sorglos stimmte.

Es mute noch sehr frh sein, denn das Leben im Gras unter ihr nahm erst
seinen Anfang. Unter ihrer blauen Glocke war sie wohlgeborgen und konnte
den erwachenden Verkehr unter sich prchtig beobachten. Darber verga
sie fr eine Weile ihren Kummer und das Heimweh, das sich in ihrem
Herzen einstellte. Es war gar zu unterhaltend, so von einem sicheren
Versteck aus, von oben her, auf das Leben und Treiben der Grasbewohner
herabzuschaun. Aber allmhlich zog es ihre Gedanken doch nach ihrer
verlassenen Heimat, nach dem Schutz und der starken Gemeinschaft des
Bienenstocks. Dort saen sie nun beieinander, des Ruhetags froh, bauten
vielleicht hier und da ein wenig an den Zellen, oder ftterten die
kleinen Maden. Aber im allgemeinen war es recht ruhig und beschaulich im
Stock an Regentagen. Nur zuweilen flogen Kundschafter aus, sahen nach
dem Stand des Wetters und erforschten, von welcher Seite der Wind kam.
Die Knigin ging im Reiche umher, von Etage zu Etage, prfte alles,
lobte oder tadelte, legte wohl hin und wieder ein Ei und beglckte alle
durch ihre knigliche Gegenwart. Wie froh machte es, einen Blick von ihr
aufzufangen oder ein huldvolles Wort. Es kam vor, da sie den jngeren
Bienen, die ihre ersten Leistungen hinter sich hatten, freundlich ber
die Kpfchen strich oder sich nach ihren Erlebnissen erkundigte.

Ach, wie glcklich machte es, sich dazu rechnen zu drfen, sich von
allen geachtet zu wissen und den starken Schutz der Gemeinschaft
genieen zu knnen. Hier an ihrem einsamen und ausgesetzten Platz war
sie gefhrdet und fror. Und wenn der Regen anhielt, was sollte sie dann
beginnen und wodurch sollte sie sich ernhren? Honigsaft war kaum in der
Glockenblume zu finden, und der Bltenstaub wrde auch nicht allzulange
vorhalten. Sie empfand zum ersten Male, wie notwendig zu allem
Wanderleben und zum Vagabundentum der Sonnenschein war. Ohne den
Sonnenschein wre wohl niemand leichtsinnig, dachte sie.

Aber, wenn sie sich nur des Sonnenscheins erinnerte, erfllte es sie
schon wieder mit Freude und heimlichem Stolz, da sie so mutig gewesen
war, ihr Leben auf eigene Faust zu beginnen. Was hatte sie in der kurzen
Zeit ihres Wanderns nicht schon alles gesehn und erfahren! Davon wuten
die andern wohl ihr Leben lang nur wenig. Erfahrung ist doch das hchste
Lebensgut und ihrer Opfer wert, dachte sie.

Unten zog ein Trupp Wanderameisen im Gras vorber. Sie schritten singend
durch den khlen Graswald und schienen Eile zu haben. Ihr frisches
Morgenlied erklang im Marschtakt und stimmte das Herz der kleinen Maja
wehmtig und nachdenklich.

  Bald ist unsre kurze Frist
  auf der Erde aus.
  Was ein rechter Ruber ist,
  macht sich nichts daraus.

Sie waren auerordentlich gut bewaffnet und sahen keck und gefhrlich
aus. Ihr Lied verklang unter den Huflattichblttern. Aber dort schienen
sie mit ihrem Gesang etwas Rechtes angerichtet zu haben, denn es erklang
nun eine rauhe heisere Stimme, und die kleinen Blttchen eines jungen
Lwenzahns wurden energisch auseinandergedrngt. Maja sah einen groen
blauen Kfer hervordringen, der wie eine Halbkugel aus glnzendem,
dunklem Metall aussah und bald blulich, bald grnlich, zuweilen auch
ganz schwarz schimmerte. Er war wohl zwei- oder dreimal so gro wie sie.
Sein harter Panzer schien ihr von unzerstrbarer Festigkeit, und seine
tiefe Stimme hatte etwas gradezu Einschchterndes. Er schien durch den
Gesang der Soldaten erwacht und bei sehr schlechter Laune zu sein. Sein
Haar war noch nicht geordnet, und er rieb sich den Schlaf aus den blauen
listigen uglein.

Ich komme, schrie er, das gengt fr alle, um Platz zu machen.

Gottlob stehe ich ihm nicht im Wege, dachte Maja, die sich in ihrem
hohen schwebenden Versteck sicher fhlte. Aber ihr Herz klopfte doch ein
wenig, und sie zog sich leise einen Schritt weiter in die Bltenglocke
zurck.

Der Kfer bewegte sich schwerfllig und schaukelnd durch das nasse Gras.
Eine sehr elegante Erscheinung war er eben nicht. Bei einem welken
Blatt, grade unter ihrer Blte, machte er halt, schob es zur Seite und
trat etwas zurck. Da erkannte Maja darunter den Eingang zu einer Hhle.

Nein, was es nicht alles gibt, dachte sie neugierig, davon habe ich mir
keine Vorstellung gemacht. Man kann gar nicht lange genug leben, um
alles zu erfahren, was auf der Welt mglich ist. Sie verhielt sich ganz
still. Nur der Regen rieselte leise nieder. Da hrte sie den Kfer in
die Hhle hineinrufen:

Wenn Sie mit mir auf die Jagd wollen, mssen Sie sich schon
entschlieen aufzustehn. Es ist heller Tag. Weil er zuerst erwacht war,
fhlte er sich so berlegen, da es ihm schwer wurde, freundlich zu
sein.

Es dauerte eine Weile, bis Antwort kam, dann hrte Maja eine dnne
zirpende Stimme aus dem Loch schallen:

Um Gottes willen, machen Sie oben zu, es regnet herein.

Der Kfer gehorchte, neigte abwartend den Kopf etwas zur Seite und
schielte durch die Spalte.

Eilen Sie sich, wenn ich bitten darf, sagte er mrrisch.

Maja war sehr gespannt, wer herauskommen wrde. Sie kroch so weit vor,
da ein groer Regentropfen auf ihre Schulter fiel. Sie erschrak sehr
und trocknete sich ab. Unten hob sich das welke Blatt, und langsam kroch
ein braunes Tier hervor, das ihr im hohen Mae absonderlich vorkam. Es
hatte einen plumpen Leib und einen ganz ungewhnlich dicken Kopf mit
kleinen aufrechten Fhlhrnern. Die Beinchen waren sehr dnn und
bewegten sich langsam, und der Ausdruck des Gesichts war sorgenvoll.

Guten Morgen, meine Iffi, sagte der Kfer und wurde vor Hflichkeit
ganz schlank. Wie haben Sie geschlafen? und dann fgte er hinzu: mein
alles!

Iffi nahm seine Hand etwas gleichgltig.

Es geht nicht, Kurt, sagte sie, ich kann nicht mit. Die Leute reden
zu viel.

Der arme Kfer schien wirklich sehr zu erschrecken.

Ich verstehe wohl nicht richtig, stammelte er, sollte das junge Glck
unserer Freundschaft an so gleichgltigen Dingen scheitern? Bedenken Sie
doch, Iffi, was kmmern die Leute Sie? Sie haben Ihr Loch, knnen
hineinkriechen, wenn Sie wollen, und wenn Sie tief genug steigen, hren
Sie nichts.

Iffi lchelte wehmtig und berlegen.

Kurt, davon verstehn Sie nichts. Ich habe da meine eigene Anschauung.
brigens kommt noch etwas hinzu: Sie haben meine Unkenntnis in sehr
wenig feiner Weise ausgebeutet, Sie haben sich fr einen Rosenkfer
ausgegeben, und gestern sagte mir die Wegschnecke, Sie seien ein
Mistkfer. Das ist ein gewaltiger Unterschied. Die Wegschnecke hat Sie
bei einer Ttigkeit beobachtet, die ich hier nicht weiter kennzeichnen
will; Sie werden verstehen, da ich mich zurckziehe.

Als Kurt sich von seinem Schreck erholt hatte, wurde er rgerlich:

Nein, das verstehe ich nicht, rief er heftig, ich wnsche um meiner
selbst willen geliebt zu sein, und nicht um meiner Beschftigung willen.
Wie knnen Sie einen Mann danach beurteilen, wo er sich aufhlt!

Wenn es nicht grade der Mist wre, wrde ich ein Auge zudrcken, sagte
Iffi zurckhaltend. Sie mssen auch bedenken, da eine junge Witwe,
deren Gatte erst vor drei Tagen von der Spitzmaus gefressen worden ist,
sich die denkbar grte Zurckhaltung auferlegen mu. Also -- leben Sie
wohl.

Und Iffi war pltzlich mit einem Ruck in ihrer Hhle verschwunden, so
rasch, da es erschien, als habe ein Windsto sie davongerissen. Maja
hatte nicht fr mglich gehalten, da jemand so rasch in einem Loch
verschwinden knnte. Jetzt war Iffi fort, und der Kfer starrte mit
verblfftem Gesicht in die leere dunkle ffnung und sah so dumm dabei
aus, da Maja lachen mute.

Endlich besann er sich und begann betrbt und zornig seinen kleinen
rundlichen Kopf zu schtteln, und die Fhler hingen traurig nieder, wie
zwei verregnete Fcher.

Fr Charakter und gediegene Lebensfhrung hat heute niemand mehr Sinn,
seufzte er. Iffi ist herzlos, ich habe nicht gewagt, es mir
einzugestehn, aber es ist der Fall. Aber wenn sie in der Tat nicht das
Herz hat, meine Freundin zu sein, so sollte sie wenigstens den Verstand
dazu haben.

Maja sah, wie Trnen in seine Augen traten, und ihr Herz wurde von
Mitleid ergriffen.

Aber pltzlich kam Bewegung in Kurt. Er wischte die Trnen aus den Augen
und trat vorsichtig hinter einen Erdhaufen, den seine Freundin
wahrscheinlich aus ihrer Wohnung geschaufelt hatte, und Maja sah einen
kleinen rtlichen Regenwurm durch die Grser kommen. Er hatte eine sehr
ungewhnliche Art der Fortbewegung, bald machte er sich lang und dnn,
dann wieder kurz und dick, und seine rote Krperspitze bestand aus
lauter zarten Ringen, die sich lautlos verschoben und vorantasteten.
Sie erschrak sehr, als Kurt pltzlich einen Schritt aus seinem Versteck
hervor machte, den Wurm ergriff und ihn in zwei Hlften zerbi. Er
begann gelassen die eine Hlfte zu verzehren und kmmerte sich wenig um
die verzweifelten Windungen, die die beiden Wurmhlften am Boden und in
seinen Armen ausfhrten. Es war ein ganz kleiner Wurm.

Nur Geduld, sagte Kurt, gleich ist es vorber.

Aber whrend er kaute, schien er wieder an Iffi zu denken, die er fr
alle Zeit verloren hatte, und groe Trnen rollten ber seine Backen.

Die kleine Maja in ihrem Versteck bedauerte ihn herzlich. Es gibt doch
sehr viel Trauriges in der Welt, dachte sie. Da sah sie, da die eine
Wurmhlfte, die Kurt in seiner Bekmmernis zur Seite gelegt hatte, sich
eilig entfernte.

Nein, so was! rief sie, und sie tat es vor Schrecken so laut, da Kurt
sich verwundert umschaute.

Machen Sie Platz! rief er, als er es hrte.

Aber ich sitze Ihnen ja gar nicht im Weg, antwortete Maja.

Wo sitzen Sie denn? fragte er, Sie mssen doch irgendwo sitzen.

Hier oben, rief Maja, ber Ihnen in der Blume.

Ich will es Ihnen glauben, sagte Kurt, aber ich bin kein Grashpfer,
ich kann mich unmglich so weit nach oben umdrehn, da ich Sie sehe.
Weshalb haben Sie denn geschrien?

Die eine Hlfte vom Wurm luft fort, rief Maja.

Ja, ja, sagte Kurt und sah dem halben Wrmchen nach, diese Tiere sind
sehr regsam. Ich habe keinen Appetit mehr. Damit warf er den Rest des
Wurms fort, den er noch in seinen Hnden gehalten hatte, und dieser
briggebliebene Teil entfernte sich nach der andern Seite.

Maja wurde ganz verwirrt, aber Kurt schien mit dieser Eigenart des Wurms
vertraut zu sein.

Sie mssen nicht denken, da ich immer Wurm esse, sagte er, aber es
finden sich nicht berall Rosen.

Sagen Sie doch wenigstens dem Kleinen, wo seine andere Hlfte
hingelaufen ist, antwortete Maja in groer Erregung.

Kurt schttelte ernst den Kopf. Was das Schicksal trennt, soll man
nicht wieder zusammenfgen, meinte er. Wer sind Sie?

Ich bin Maja, vom Volk der Bienen.

Das ist mir angenehm, sagte Kurt, ich habe nichts gegen die Bienen.
Weshalb sitzen Sie denn da herum? Das tun doch sonst Bienen nicht.
Sitzen Sie da schon lange?

Ich habe hier geschlafen.

So, machte Kurt mitrauisch. Hoffentlich haben Sie einen tiefen und
gesunden Schlaf. Sie sind wohl eben erst erwacht?

Maja besttigte es, denn sie merkte, da Kurt nicht gerne gesehn htte,
wenn sein Gesprch mit der Grille Iffi belauscht worden wre, und sie
wollte ihn nicht noch einmal betrben.

Kurt lief hin und her und versuchte hinaufzuschaun. Warten Sie, sagte
er, wenn ich mich etwas an jenem Grashalm aufrichte, werde ich Sie sehn
knnen, und Sie knnen mir in die Augen schaun. Das wollen Sie doch
jedenfalls gern.

Doch, sagte Maja, das wre mir sehr angenehm.

Kurt fand einen geeigneten Halm, es war der Stiel einer Butterblume, und
da die Blte sich etwas zur Seite neigte, konnte Maja ihn ansehn, als er
sich nun auf die Hinterbeinchen stellte und zu ihr emporschaute. Sie
fand, da er ein freundliches und liebes Gesicht hatte; ganz jung schien
er nicht mehr zu sein; und er war etwas voll in den Backen. Nun
verbeugte er sich, so da die Blume ein wenig schaukelte, und stellte
sich vor:

Kurt, von der Familie der Rosenkfer.

Die kleine Maja mute heimlich lachen, denn sie wute nur zu gut, da
Kurt ein Mistkfer war, aber da sie ihn nicht krnken wollte, sagte sie
nichts darber.

Macht Ihnen der Regen nichts aus? fragte Maja.

O nein, das bin ich von den Rosen her gewohnt, da regnet es meistens.

Maja dachte: ein wenig mu ich ihn doch fr seine dreisten Lgen
strafen, er ist doch ein recht eitler Geselle.

Kurt, sagte sie und lchelte vorsichtig, was ist das da eigentlich
fr ein Loch unter dem Blatt?

Kurt erschrak.

Ein Loch? fragte er, sprechen Sie von irgendeinem Loch? Es gibt sehr
viele Lcher, es wird so ein Loch sein, irgendsoeins. Sie machen sich
keine Vorstellung, wie viele Erdlcher es gibt.

Aber in der heimlichen Bestrzung, in die er geraten war, ereignete sich
etwas ganz Furchtbares. Kurt hatte in seinem Eifer und in seinem
Bemhen, sich mglichst gleichgltig zu stellen, das bergewicht
verloren. Maja hrte ihn verzweifelt aufschreien und gleich darauf sah
sie ihn auf dem Rcken liegen und mit Armen und Beinen hilflos und
klglich in der Luft zappeln.

Es ist aus mit mir! schrie er, ich bin nicht in der Lage, mich wieder
aufzurichten. Ich werde sterben mssen. Ein bejammernswerteres Geschick
ist nie vorgekommen.

Er klagte so laut, da er Majas Trostworte nicht verstand. Dabei
versuchte er mit seinen Fen den Boden zu gewinnen, aber jedesmal, wenn
er sich festzuhalten glaubte, gaben die kleinen Erdballen nach, die er
mhsam ergriffen hatte, und er fiel wieder auf seinen hohen, runden
Rcken zurck. Es war wirklich ein auerordentlich trostloser Anblick,
und die kleine Maja hatte ehrlich Angst um ihn, zumal er schon ganz
bleich im Gesicht war und sein Geschrei in der Tat herzzerreiend klang.

Ich halte diese Lage nicht aus, rief er, schauen Sie wenigstens fort.
Qulen Sie nicht einen Sterbenden durch zudringliche Blicke. Ach wenn
ich wenigstens einen der Grashalme erreichen knnte, oder den Stiel der
Butterblume. Wer kann sich an der Luft festhalten? Das kann niemand.

Das Herz der kleinen Maja zitterte vor Erbarmen.

Warten Sie, rief sie, ich will versuchen Sie aufzurichten. Es mu
doch gehn, wenn ich mich anstrenge. Oder Kurt, lieber Kurt, schreien Sie
doch nicht so, hren Sie mich an: Wenn ich einen kleinen Grashalm
niederbiege und reiche Ihnen das uerste Ende, wrden Sie sich dann
helfen knnen?

Kurt jammerte nur und verstand sie nicht, er war vor Todesangst ganz von
Sinnen. Da flog die kleine Maja trotz des rieselnden Regens aus ihrem
Versteck nieder, suchte einen schmalen grnen Grashalm, der in Kurts
Nhe wuchs, und klammerte sich an der uersten dnnen Spitze fest. Sie
jubelte vor Freude, als der Halm sich unter ihrer Last so niederbog, da
er grade quer ber den zappelnden Kurt sank.

Halten Sie sich fest, schrie Maja.

Kurt fhlte etwas ber seinem Gesicht und griff hastig zu, erst mit
einer Hand, dann mit beiden und endlich auch mit den Beinchen, die
prchtige scharfe Krallen hatten, jedes zwei. Langsam zog er sich immer
weiter daran hin, bis er die Wurzel des Halms erreicht hatte, und dort,
wo er strker und dicker war, konnte er sich aufrichten.

Er atmete tief auf.

Mein Gott, sagte er. Das war ganz schrecklich. Ohne meine
Geistesgegenwart wre ich zweifellos ein Opfer Ihrer Geschwtzigkeit
geworden.

Geht es Ihnen besser? fragte die kleine Maja.

Kurt hielt seine Stirn.

Danke, danke, wenn dieses Schwindelgefhl weicht, werde ich Ihnen
genaue Auskunft geben.

Aber Maja erfuhr die Antwort auf ihre Frage nicht mehr, denn es kam eine
Grasmcke durch die Halme geflattert, die auf der Jagd nach Insekten
war. Die kleine Biene drckte sich fest an den Boden und verhielt sich
ganz still, bis der Vogel vorber war. Als sie sich spter nach Kurt
umsah, war er verschwunden, und da machte auch sie sich auf und flog
davon, denn es hatte aufgehrt zu regnen, und der Tag war hell und warm.




Fnftes Kapitel

+Der Grashpfer+


Das war einmal ein Tag! Morgens ganz frh hatte es getaut, dann war die
Sonne ber dem Wald aufgegangen und hatte ihre Strahlen schrg ber den
grnen Graswald geschickt, so da ein Glitzern und Funkeln begann, da
man vor Seligkeit und Entzcken ber einen Anblick von solcher Pracht
nicht wute, was man sagen oder tun sollte.

Die kleine Maja hatte schon gleich beim Erwachen lauter helle Jubelrufe
um sich her vernommen. Teils kamen sie hoch aus den Bumen von den
gefrchteten Vgeln, deren Stimmen doch so lieblich erklingen konnten,
oder aus der Luft von vorberfliegenden Insekten oder aus Bschen und
Gras von Kfern, Schmetterlingen und kleinen und groen Fliegen.

Maja hatte es sich in einem Baumloch recht behaglich eingerichtet. Es
war sicher und trocken und blieb auch nachts recht lange warm, da den
Tag ber die Sonne auf den Eingang schien. Zwar hatte sie einmal in
aller Frhe den Specht am Stamm ihres Baums klopfen hren und sich
schleunigst davon gemacht. Denn den Specht klopfen zu hren, das ist
fr ein kleines Insekt, das sich in der Baumrinde verborgen hlt, so
schlimm, als wenn unsereins nachts die Gerusche eines Einbrechers hrt,
der die Fensterlden aufbricht. Aber in der Nacht war sie sicher, dann
suchte niemand sie in ihrem hohen Versteck.

In einem zurckliegenden Spltchen, in dem es dunkel und khl war, hatte
sie sich ein kleines Honiglager angelegt, um fr Regentage mit Nahrung
versorgt zu sein; und den Eingang zu ihrer Waldburg hatte sie mit Wachs
ein wenig zugeklebt, so da er nicht grer als eben ntig war, um
bequem hineinschlpfen zu knnen.

Und mit einem hellen Jubel voll Lebensfreude schwang sich die kleine
Maja an diesem Morgen in den Sonnenschein hinaus, um zu erfahren, was
dieser neue schne Tag ihr bringen wrde.

Sie segelte gradaus durch das goldene Licht der Luft, so da sie wie ein
kleines rasches Pnktchen aussah, das der Wind dahintrieb.

Heute werde ich einem Menschen begegnen, rief sie, an solchen Tagen
sind sicher auch die Menschen unterwegs, um sich in der hellen Natur zu
erfreuen. Es waren ihr noch niemals so viele Insekten begegnet, es war
ein Kommen und Treiben, ein Summen, Lachen und Jubeln in der Luft, da
man unwillkrlich mit einstimmen mute.

Die kleine Maja lie sich endlich in einem Graswald nieder, in dem
vielerlei Blumen und Pflanzen wuchsen. Die hchsten waren die weilichen
Bltenbschel der Schafgarbe und Mohnblumen, die knallrot und leuchtend
eine groe Anziehungskraft ausbten. Als Maja ein wenig Honig aus einer
Akeleiblume genommen hatte und eben im Begriff war, weiterzufliegen,
begegnete ihr auf einem Grashalm, der sich zu ihrer Blume hinberbog,
ein ganz seltsamer Geselle. Anfangs erschrak sie sehr, weil sie nicht
fr mglich gehalten hatte, da solch ein grnes hageres Ungetm
vorkommen knnte, aber dann wurde doch ihr ganzes Interesse in so hohem
Mae wach, da sie wie angewurzelt sitzenblieb und den langbeinigen
Fremdling anstarrte. Es sah aus, als habe er Hrner, aber es war nur
seine seltsam vorgerckte Stirn, die es so erscheinen lie. Zwei
unendlich lange, fadendnne Fhler waren daran, er erschien sehr schlank
und hatte zierliche Vorderbeinchen und ganz dnne unauffllige
Flgelchen, mit denen sich nach Majas Meinung nicht viel anfangen lie.
Das Merkwrdigste aber waren seine zwei groen, hohen Hinterbeine, die
ihn wie zwei riesige geknickte Stelzen weit berragten. Er war ber und
ber grn, und seine listigen Augen hatten etwas Freches und Erstauntes
zugleich, aber man konnte wohl sagen, da sie nicht boshaft, sondern
viel eher gutmtig waren.

Nun, Mamsell, sagte er zu Maja, offenbar durch ihren verwunderten
Gesichtsausdruck gergert, Sie haben wohl noch keinen Grashpfer
gesehn? Oder legen Sie Eier?

Was fllt Ihnen ein, rief Maja zornig. Wie sollte ich auf diesen
Gedanken kommen? Auch wenn ich es knnte, wrde ich es niemals tun. Wie
sollte ich den heiligen Pflichten der Knigin in so leichtsinniger Weise
vorgreifen?

Der Grashpfer duckte sich etwas zusammen und machte ein ganz
unbeschreiblich komisches Gesicht, so da Maja trotz ihres Verdrusses
laut lachen mute.

Mamsell, rief er, aber dann mute er selber lachen und sagte nur noch:
Nein so was! Sie sind aber Eine!

Maja wurde ganz ungeduldig durch das Benehmen dieses seltsamen Gesellen.
Warum lachen Sie denn? fragte sie nicht grade freundlich, Sie knnen
doch nicht im Ernst verlangen, da ich Eier legen soll, und noch dazu
hier auf den Rasen.

Da knackte es, der Grashpfer sagte: Hoppla, und fort war er.

Maja war ganz verdutzt. Hoch in die Luft hatte er sich geschwungen, ohne
seine Flgel zu brauchen, in einem riesigen Bogen und, wie es Maja
erschien, in einer an Wahnsinn grenzenden Tollkhnheit.

Aber da war er schon wieder. Sie hatte nicht sehen knnen, woher er kam,
aber nun sa er neben ihr auf dem Blatt der Akeleiblume.

Er betrachtete sie von allen Seiten, von hinten und von vorn:

Nein, sagte er dann schnippisch, Sie knnen allerdings keine Eier
legen, Sie sind nicht darauf eingerichtet. Sie haben keinen
Legestachel.

Was, sagte Maja, keinen Legestachel? Sie deckte sich etwas mit ihren
Flgeln zu und drehte sich so um, da der Fremde nur ihr Gesicht sehn
konnte.

Ja natrlich. Fallen Sie nur nicht von Ihrem Podium, Mamsell. Sie sind
eine Wespe, nicht wahr?

Etwas Schlimmeres htte nun der kleinen Maja in aller Welt nicht
begegnen knnen.

Schockschwerenot! rief sie.

Hoppla! antwortete der Grashpfer und fort war er.

Ich werde ganz nervs ber so einer Person, sagte Maja und beschlo
fortzufliegen. Solange sie denken konnte, war ihr eine solche
Beleidigung noch nicht widerfahren. Mit einer Wespe verwechselt zu
werden, bedeutete ihr die grte Schmach, mit diesem nutzlosen
Raubgesindel, mit diesem Diebsvolk, diesen Landstreichern. Es war in der
Tat emprend.

Aber da war der Grashpfer pltzlich wieder da.

Mamsell, rief er, und drehte sich langsam ein wenig, wobei seine
langen Hinterbeine aussahen wie Uhrzeiger, wenn es fnf Minuten vor halb
sieben ist, Mamsell, Sie mssen entschuldigen, da ich zuweilen das
Gesprch unterbreche. Aber pltzlich packt es mich. Ich mu springen,
um die Welt mu ich springen, wohin es immer sei. Kennen Sie das nicht
auch?

Er zog seinen Mund von einem Ohr zum anderen, indem er Maja anlchelte.
Sie konnte nicht anders, sie mute lachen.

Nicht wahr? sagte der Grashpfer und nickte ermutigend.

Wer sind Sie denn nur? fragte Maja, Sie sind schrecklich aufregend.

Aber man kennt mich doch berall, sagte der Grne und grinste wieder,
so erschpfend, wie Maja noch niemals jemanden hatte grinsen sehn. Sie
wute nie recht, ob er etwas im Ernst oder im Scherz meinte.

Ich bin in dieser Gegend fremd, sagte sie freundlich, sonst wrde ich
Sie sicher kennen, aber ich bitte Sie, sich zu merken, da ich zur
Familie der Bienen gehre, und da ich durchaus keine Wespe bin.

Ach Gott, sagte der Grashpfer, das ist doch dasselbe.

Maja konnte vor Aufregung kaum sprechen.

Sie sind ungebildet, stie sie endlich hervor. Schaun Sie sich doch
einmal eine Wespe an.

Was knnte mich wohl dazu veranlassen? antwortete der Grne. Wohin
wrde es fhren, wenn ich mir Unterschiede merkte, die nur in der
Einbildung existieren? Sie fliegen in der Luft herum, stechen alles, was
in Ihre Nhe kommt, und knnen nicht springen. Genau so ist es mit den
Wespen. Wo liegt also der Unterschied? Hoppla! Und fort war er.

Jetzt flieg ich aber, dachte Maja.

Da war er wieder.

Mamsell, rief er, morgen ist Wettspringen im Garten des Pfarrers
Sndepiek. Wollen Sie eine Freikarte, um zuschauen zu knnen? Meine Alte
hat deren noch zwei, gegen ein Kompliment gibt sie eine her. Ich hoffe
den bestehenden Rekord zu schlagen.

Ich interessiere mich nicht fr so ein Gehpfe, sagte Maja nicht ohne
Verdru. Wer fliegen kann, hat hhere Interessen.

Der Grashpfer grinste, da man es frmlich zu hren glaubte.

berschtzen Sie sich nicht, Mamsell. Die meisten Tiere der Welt knnen
fliegen, aber springen knnen die wenigsten. Sie haben keinen berblick
ber die Interessen der Mitwelt. Den Wunsch nach einem hohen, eleganten
Sprung finden Sie sogar bei den Menschen. Krzlich sah ich den Pfarrer
Sndepiek fast einen Meter hoch springen, um einer kleinen Schlange zu
imponieren, die vor ihm ber den Weg lief. Seine Verachtung gegen alles,
was nicht Springen war, ging dabei so weit, da er seine Pfeife
fortschleuderte, ohne die kein Pfarrer leben kann. Begreifen Sie diesen
Ehrgeiz! -- Ich habe Grashpfer gekannt, und sie gehrten zu meiner
Familie, die dreihundertmal so hoch sprangen, als sie selbst gro waren.
Ja, nun staunen Sie und sagen kein Wort mehr, und bereuen innerlich
alles, was Sie eben vorgebracht haben, und was Sie eventuell noch htten
behaupten wollen. Dreihundertmal so hoch, als er gro war! Muten Sie so
etwas mal jemandem zu! Selbst das grte Tier der Welt, der Elefant, ist
nicht in der Lage, einen solchen Sprung auszufhren. Nun? Da schweigen
Sie! Habe ich nicht gesagt, da Sie schweigen wrden?

Aber wie soll ich denn reden, wenn Sie nicht einen Augenblick still
sind, rief Maja.

Reden Sie also, sagte der Grashpfer freundlich, und dann rief er
Hoppla und war fort.

Da mute die kleine Maja trotz ihres Verdrusses doch lachen. So etwas
war ihr noch niemals begegnet. So sehr der Grashpfer sie durch sein
scherzhaftes Benehmen in Erstaunen setzte, so bewunderte sie doch seine
Welterfahrenheit und seine groen Kenntnisse. Wenn sie es auch mit dem
Springen nicht hielt wie er, so war sie doch verwundert ber alle die
Neuigkeiten, die sie in der kurzen Unterhaltung erfahren hatte. Wenn der
Grne nur etwas zuverlssiger gewesen wre, sie htte ihn gar zu gern
nach diesem oder jenem gefragt. Oft erleben wirklich diejenigen am
meisten, dachte sie, die am wenigsten damit anzufangen wissen.

Ob er die Sprache der Menschen verstehen konnte, da er doch ihre Namen
wute? Danach wollte sie ihn fragen, wenn er noch einmal zurckkam, und
auch danach, wie er ber eine Annherung dachte und ber den Versuch,
den Menschen in seiner Behausung aufzusuchen.

Mamsell! rief es neben ihr, und ein Grashalm schwankte.

Mein Gott, sagte Maja, wo kommen Sie nur immer her?

Aus der Umgegend, sagte der Grashpfer.

Aber ich bitte Sie, rief Maja, springen Sie denn so aufs Geratewohl
in die Welt, ohne zu wissen, wohin es Sie fhrt, ohne den Ort zu kennen,
wo Sie ankommen?

Natrlich, sagte der Grne. Was denn sonst? Knnen etwa Sie in die
Zukunft sehn? Das kann niemand. Nur der Laubfrosch kann es, aber er sagt
nicht wie.

Was Sie alles wissen, rief die kleine Maja, das ist einfach
groartig. Verstehn Sie auch die Sprache der Menschen?

Das ist eine Frage, die schwer zu beantworten ist, Mamsell, denn es ist
noch nicht nachgewiesen, ob die Menschen eine Sprache haben. Sie stoen
zuweilen Laute aus, deren abscheuliche Klanglosigkeit mit nichts zu
vergleichen ist. Offenbar verstndigen sie sich dadurch. Was man ihnen
lassen mu, ist ein aufrichtiges Verlangen nach ertrglichen Stimmen.
Ich beobachtete zwei Knaben, die Grashalme zwischen ihre Finger nahmen
und mit ihrem Mund Luft darauf bliesen, so da ein surrender Ton
entstand, der dem Zirpen einer Grille vielleicht verglichen werden
knnte. Aber er blieb weit dahinter zurck. Jedenfalls tun sie, was sie
knnen. Wollen Sie sonst noch etwas wissen? Ich wei immerhin
mancherlei.

Und er grinste die kleine Maja an, da man es frmlich hrte.

Aber als er nun das nchste Mal unversehens davonsprang, blieb er aus,
und die Biene wartete eine Weile vergeblich auf ihn. Sie suchte
ringsumher im Gras und in den Blumen, aber es war unmglich, ihn
wiederzufinden.




Sechstes Kapitel

+Puck+


Die Mittagshitze dieses schnen Sommertags machte die kleine Maja recht
mde, sie flog gemchlich an grell beschienenen Gartenbschen vorber,
bis die groen Bltter eines riesigen Kastanienbaums ihr Schutz und
Khle boten. Es standen Tische und Bnke unter der Kastanie auf dem
zertretenen Rasen; offenbar war es eine Sommerwirtschaft, die unter der
Baumkrone aufgeschlagen war. In der Nhe schimmerte das rote Ziegeldach
eines Bauernhauses, aus dessen Schornsteinen ein blulicher Rauch in den
Sonnenschein emporzog.

Nun schien es der kleinen Maja ganz unvermeidlich, da sie endlich einem
Menschen begegnen mte, war sie nicht bis unmittelbar in sein
Machtbereich vorgedrungen? Sicherlich war dieser Baum sein Eigentum, und
die seltsamen Holzgerte im Schatten drunten gehrten zu seinem Stock.

Da summte es neben ihr, und eine Fliege lie sich auf ihrem Blatt
nieder. Sie lief eine Weile auf dem grnen Geder herum, immer in
kleinen Sten, so da man die Bewegungen ihrer Beine nicht sah und fast
glauben konnte, sie rutschte rasch und aufgeregt hin und her. Dann flog
sie von einem Teil des groen gefingerten Blattes zum andern, aber so
schnell und unversehens, da jeder geglaubt htte, sie wre gesprungen
statt geflogen. Aber es sah nur so aus. Offenbar war ihr daran gelegen,
herauszubekommen, auf welchem Teil des Blattes es am angenehmsten war.
Zuweilen schwang sie sich fr ein ganz kleines Stckchen urpltzlich in
die Luft, brummte dabei geradezu leidenschaftlich, als sei etwas
Unerhrtes geschehen, oder als bewegte sie das grte Vorhaben der Welt,
lie sich aber dann wieder nieder und machte wieder ihre sprunghaften
Laufstrecken, als sei nichts geschehn, dann wieder sa sie ganz still,
als ob sie pltzlich erstarrt wre.

Maja sah zu, was die Fliege da in der Sonne tat. Endlich nherte sie
sich ihr und sagte hflich:

Ich wnsche guten Tag und heie Sie auf meinem Blatt willkommen; soviel
ich wei, sind Sie eine Fliege.

Was denn sonst? fragte die Kleine, ich heie Puck, ich bin sehr
beschftigt. Wollen Sie mich vertreiben?

O nein. Es freut mich, Ihre Bekanntschaft zu machen, entgegnete Maja.

Das glaub ich, sagte Puck nur, und versuchte sich den Kopf
abzureien.

Um Gottes willen, rief Maja, schonen Sie sich!

Das mu sein, davon verstehn Sie nichts, entgegnete Puck gelassen, und
fuhr sich mit den Beinen ber die Flgel, so da sie sich hinten tief um
den Leib bogen. Ich bin brigens eine Stubenfliege, fgte sie nicht
ohne Stolz hinzu, ich weile hier nur in der Sommerfrische.

Wie interessant, rief die kleine Maja glcklich, da kennen Sie
sicherlich den Menschen?

Den kenne ich wie meine Hosentasche, warf Puck geringschtzig ein,
ich sitze tglich darauf. Ja, aber wissen Sie denn das nicht? Ihr
Bienen seid doch sonst so gescheit, ihr glaubt es wenigstens zu sein.

Ich heie Maja, antwortete die kleine Biene etwas schchtern. Sie
begriff nicht recht, wo die andern Insekten ihr Selbstbewutsein, ihre
Sicherheit und oft sogar ihre Frechheit hernahmen.

Es ist schon gut, wehrte Puck ab, heien Sie, wie Sie wollen, dumm
sind Sie jedenfalls.

Puck sa da, wie eine Kanone, die grade abgefeuert werden soll, der Kopf
und die Brust ragten empor, und die unterste Spitze ihres Leibes
berhrte das Blatt. Dann pltzlich duckte sie sich zusammen, so da es
aussah, als habe sie keine Beine.

Vorsichtig mu man sein, sagte sie, darauf kommt es an.

Aber in der kleinen Maja wallte es nach der Krnkung, die Puck
ausgesprochen hatte, zornig empor. Ohne da sie recht wute, was sie
eigentlich trieb, schwang sie sich blitzschnell auf Puck zu, ergriff sie
beim Kragen und hielt sie fest.

Ich werde Sie lehren, gegen eine Biene hflich zu sein, rief sie.

Puck fing ein frchterliches Geschrei an.

Stechen Sie nicht, schrie sie, das ist das einzige, was Sie knnen,
aber es schadet. Bitte nehmen Sie Ihren Hinterleib weg, soweit als
mglich, darin sitzt der Stachel. Und lassen Sie mich los, wenn es Ihnen
mglich ist, ich will alles tun, was Sie wollen. Verstehen Sie denn
keinen Scherz!? Es wei doch jeder, da Ihr Bienen unter den Insekten
die angesehensten seid, die mchtigsten und die zahlreichsten. Nur nicht
tten, wenn ich bitten darf, es wre nachher nicht mehr gutzumachen.
Herrgott, da niemand fr meinen Humor Verstndnis hat.

Gut, sagte Maja, nicht ohne ein wenig Verachtung im Herzen, ich werde
Sie leben lassen, wenn Sie mir vom Menschen alles sagen, was Sie
wissen.

Gern, rief Puck, ich hatte es ohnehin vor, aber jetzt lassen Sie
los.

Maja tat es. Es war ihr pltzlich gleichgltig geworden, sie hatte
Vertrauen und Achtung vor der Fliege verloren. Was so ein Gesindel in
Erfahrung bringt, dachte sie, hat fr ernste Leute wenig Wert, ich werde
wohl doch selbst sehen mssen, welche Beschaffenheit es mit dem Menschen
hat.

Aber die kleine Fliege Puck wurde doch um vieles ertrglicher, nachdem
sie diese ernste Lehre empfangen hatte. Zu Anfang ordnete sie unter
Gebrumm und Schelten ihre Fhler, Flgel und die Hrchen ihres schwarzen
Krpers. Alles war sehr in Unordnung geraten, denn die kleine Maja hatte
fest zugepackt. Zum Schlu lie Puck seinen Rssel ein und aus fahren,
etwas, das Maja noch niemals gesehn hatte.

Verstaucht! Total verstaucht ist der Rssel, rief sie schmerzlich,
das kommt von dieser Erregtheit, mit der Sie vorgehen. Sehen Sie
selbst, unten die Saugplatte sieht aus wie ein verbogener Blechteller!

Haben Sie eine Saugplatte? fragte Maja.

Ach Gott, selbstverstndlich! Was wollen Sie also ber den Menschen
wissen? Das mit dem Rssel wird sich schon geben. Ich denke, am besten
erzhle ich Ihnen aus meinem Leben. Da ich unter Menschen gro geworden
bin, werden Sie schon erfahren, was Sie wissen wollen.

Sie sind unter Menschen gro geworden?

Aber ja doch. In ihre Stubenecke legte meine Mutter das Ei, aus dem ich
gekrochen bin, auf ihren Gardinen habe ich die ersten Gehversuche
gemacht, und von Schiller bis Goethe probierte ich die Kraft meiner
Flgel zum erstenmal.

Maja fragte, was Schiller und Goethe seien, und Puck erklrte es ihr
berlegen. Das seien die Statuen zweier Menschen, die sich offenbar
besonders ausgezeichnet htten. Sie stnden unter dem Spiegel, rechts
und links, und wrden von niemand beachtet.

Nun wollte Maja wissen, was ein Spiegel sei und warum diese beiden
Statuen darunter stnden.

Im Spiegel sieht man sich an seinem Bauch, wenn man darauf kriecht,
erklrte Puck. Es ist sehr amsant. Wenn die Menschen vor ihn
hintreten, fahren sie sich entweder in die Haare, oder sie reien an
ihrem Bart. Wenn sie allein sind, lcheln sie hinein, aber wenn noch
jemand im Zimmer ist, so machen sie ernste Angesichter. Den Zweck wei
ich nicht, ich habe ihn nie ergrnden knnen, er scheint eine unntige
Spielerei der Menschen zu sein. Ich selbst habe in meinen ersten
Lebenstagen sehr darunter gelitten, weil ich hineinflog und natrlich
auf das heftigste zurckgeschleudert wurde.

Es war der kleinen Puck sehr schwer, Maja weitere Fragen ber den
Spiegel genau zu beantworten. Sehen Sie, sagte sie endlich, Sie sind
doch sicher einmal ber eine blanke Wasserflche geflogen? So etwa ist
ein Spiegel, nur aufrecht und hart.

Die kleine Fliege wurde um vieles freundlicher, nun da sie merkte, da
Maja ihr zuhrte und da ihre Erfahrungen Beachtung fanden. Und wenn
Maja auch keineswegs alles glaubte, was sie von der Fliege hrte, so
bereute sie es doch, so gering von ihr gedacht zu haben. Andere sind oft
um vieles gescheiter, als wir anfangs glauben, dachte sie.

Und Puck fuhr fort zu erzhlen:

Es dauerte lange, bis ich die Sprache der Menschen verstehen lernte.
Man lernt sie schwer, ohne gewissermaen mit den Menschen auf du zu
stehen. Jetzt wei ich endlich, was sie wollen. Viel ist es nicht, fr
gewhnlich sagen sie jeden Tag dasselbe.

Aber das kann ich mir gar nicht denken, sagte Maja. Die Menschen
haben doch so vielerlei Interessen, sie sind reich an Gedanken und gro
an Taten. Ich habe von Kassandra gehrt, da sie Stdte bauen, die
grer sind, als da man sie an einem Tag umfliegen kann, Trme, die so
hoch sind wie der Brautflug unserer Knigin, Huser, die auf dem Wasser
schwimmen, und andere, die schneller als ein Vogel ber das Land
dahingleiten, auf zwei schmalen silbernen Straen.

Halt! sagte Puck energisch, wer ist denn berhaupt Kassandra? Wer ist
das, wenn ich fragen darf? Nun?

Ach so, sagte Maja, es ist meine Erzieherin gewesen.

Eine Erzieherin, wiederholte Puck geringschtzig, wahrscheinlich also
eine Biene. Wer anders knnte zu solcher berschtzung des Menschen
kommen. Dieses Frulein Kassandra, oder wie sie sich rufen lt, hat
keine geschichtliche Kenntnis. Die Einrichtungen der Menschen, von denen
Sie eben gesprochen haben, sind smtlich ohne besonderen Wert fr uns.
Wer wird die Welt so unpraktisch sehen, wie Sie es tun. Wenn Sie nicht
von der Voraussetzung ausgehen, da die Erde von den Fliegen beherrscht
wird, da die Fliegen das verbreitetste und wichtigste Geschlecht sind,
werden Sie die Welt kaum richtig erkennen lernen.

Puck machte ein paar aufgeregte Zickzackwege auf dem Blatt und ri an
ihrem Kopf, so da Maja ganz besorgt wurde. Aber die kleine Biene hatte
nun doch gemerkt, da sie nicht gar zuviel Gescheites von der Fliege
erfahren wrde.

Wissen Sie, woran Sie sehen knnen, da ich recht habe? fragte Puck,
und rieb sich die Hnde, als ob sie sie miteinander verknoten wollte,
zhlen Sie in einer Stube die Menschen und die Fliegen. Das Resultat
wird Sie in ungeahnter Weise in Erstaunen setzen.

Vielleicht haben Sie recht, sagte Maja, aber darauf kommt es nicht
an.

Glauben Sie brigens, ich sei diesjhrig? fragte Puck pltzlich.

Ich wei es nicht, antwortete Maja.

Ich habe berwintert, berichtete Puck stolz. Meine Erfahrungen gehen
bis in die Eiszeit. Sie fhren gewissermaen mitten hindurch. Darum
weile ich hier jetzt zur Erholung.

Mut haben Sie jedenfalls, meinte Maja.

O ja, rief Puck und machte einen kleinen Luftsprung in die Sonne. Die
Fliegen sind das khnste Geschlecht, das die Erde bevlkert. Sie werden
berall sehen, da wir stets nur dann flchten, wenn es besser ist, aber
wir kommen immer wieder. Haben Sie schon einmal auf einem Menschen
gesessen?

Maja verneinte und sah schrg und mitrauisch auf die Fliege. Sie wute
immer noch nicht recht, was sie von ihr halten sollte.

Nein, sagte sie nun, ich habe kein Interesse daran.

Weil Sie es nicht kennen, meine Liebe! Wenn Sie einmal das muntere
Spiel beobachtet htten, das ich daheim mit dem Menschen treibe, so
wrden Sie vor Neid auswandern. Trotzdem will ich es Ihnen erzhlen. In
meinem Zimmer wohnt ein lterer Mensch, der die Farbe seiner Nase durch
ein eigenartiges Getrnk pflegt, das in einem Eckschrank verborgen ist.
Es duftet betubend und s; wenn er darauf zugeht, um es sich zu holen,
lchelt er, und die Augen werden klein. Er nimmt ein Glschen, und wenn
er trinkt, schaut er zur Decke herauf, ob ich schon da bin. Ich nicke
ihm zu, und er fhrt sich mit der Hand ber Stirn, Nase und Mund, um mir
anzudeuten, wo ich spter sitzen soll. Dann blinzelt er und reit den
Mund auf, so weit er kann, und zieht die Vorhnge am Fenster zu, damit
die Nachmittagssonne uns nicht strt. Endlich legt er sich auf ein
Ruhebett, das Sofa genannt wird, und stt nach kurzer Zeit dumpfe
krchzende Laute aus, die er sicher fr schn hlt. Darber wollen wir
ein andermal reden, es ist der Schlummergesang des Menschen. Fr mich
ist es das Zeichen, mich zu nhern. Zunchst nehme ich meinen Anteil aus
dem Glase, den er fr mich zurckgelassen hat. Solch ein Trpflein hat
etwas auerordentlich Belebendes, ich verstehe den Menschen. Dann fliege
ich hinzu und nehme auf der Stirn des Ruhenden Platz. Sie liegt zwischen
der Nase und dem Haar und dient zum Denken. Man sieht es an den langen
Falten, die sich wie Furchen von rechts nach links ziehen, und die beim
Denken bewegt werden mssen, wenn etwas Rechtes dabei herauskommen soll.
Auch wenn der Mensch verdrielich ist, zeigt es sich dort, aber dann
laufen die Furchen von oben nach unten und ber der Nase bildet sich
eine runzelige Erhhung.

Sobald ich sitze und in den Furchen hin und her laufe, fngt der Mensch
an, mit der Hand in die Luft zu greifen. Er meint, ich sei dort
irgendwo. Weil ich auf seinen Denkfalten sitze, kann er nicht so rasch
herausbringen, wo ich mich eigentlich befinde. Aber endlich kommt er
dahinter. Er knurrt und greift nach mir. Na, wissen Sie, Frulein Maja,
oder wie Sie sich rufen lassen, da mu man sich vorsehen. Ich sehe die
Hand kommen, aber ich warte bis zuletzt, dann mache ich rasch einen
geschickten Flug zur Seite, setze mich und schau zu, wie er nachfhlt,
ob ich noch da bin. So geht es oft eine halbe Stunde lang, Sie haben
keine Ahnung, welch eine Ausdauer der Mensch hat. Endlich springt er auf
und lt allerlei Worte hren, die von seiner Undankbarkeit Zeugnis
ablegen. Aber was wollen Sie? Ein edles Herz rechnet nicht auf Entgelt.
Ich bin dann schon wieder oben an der Zimmerdecke und hre zu, wie er
undankbar ist.

Ich kann nicht eben sagen, da mir das sonderlich gefllt, meinte
Maja. Ist es nicht recht unntz?

Soll ich etwa eine Honigwabe auf seiner Nase anbauen? rief Puck. Sie
haben keinen Humor, meine Liebe. Was tun +Sie+ denn Ntzliches?

Die kleine Maja wurde ber und ber rot. Aber sie fate sich schnell,
um Puck ihre Verlegenheit nicht merken zu lassen.

Es wird ein Tag kommen, an dem ich etwas Schnes und Groes tue, das
gut und ntzlich ist, sagte sie schnell, aber erst will ich sehn, was
in der Welt vorgeht. Ich fhle es tief im Herzen, da es so kommen mu!

Und als die kleine Maja dies ausrief, fhlte sie, wie es hei in ihr
emporwallte vor Hoffnung und Begeisterung, aber Puck schien gar nicht zu
verstehn, wie ernst es ihr war und was sie innerlich bewegte. Sie machte
ihre aufgeregten kurzen Laufstrecken hin und her und meinte endlich:

Haben Sie vielleicht etwas Honig bei sich, meine Gute?

Es tut mir sehr leid, antwortete Maja, ich wrde Ihnen gern etwas
geben, zumal Sie mich so freundlich unterhalten haben, aber ich habe
nichts. Drfte ich vielleicht noch eine Frage stellen?

Schieen Sie los, sagte Puck, ich antworte immer.

Ich mchte von Ihnen wissen, wie ich in die Behausung des Menschen
gelangen kann.

Sie mssen hineinfliegen, sagte Puck weise.

Aber wie gelingt es mir ohne Gefahr?

Warten Sie, bis eins der Fenster geffnet ist, aber merken Sie sich den
Ausgang. Sollten Sie ihn nicht wiederfinden, so fliegen Sie spter am
besten dem Licht nach. Fenster finden Sie an jedem Haus genug, Sie
brauchen nur darauf zu achten, wo die Sonne sich spiegelt. Wollen Sie
denn schon fort?

Ja, antwortete Maja und gab Puck die Hand. Leben Sie wohl und erholen
Sie sich recht. Ich habe noch allerlei vor.

Und mit ihrem vertrauten leisen Summen, das immer ein wenig sorgenvoll
klang, hob die kleine Maja ihre glnzenden Flgel und flog in den
Sonnenschein hinaus auf die Blumenwiesen, um ein wenig Nahrung zu sich
zu nehmen.

Puck sah ihr nach, berlegte alles vorsichtig, was man etwa noch uern
knnte, und sagte dann nachdenklich:

Nun, schlielich, also! -- Warum auch nicht?




Siebentes Kapitel

+Majas Gefangenschaft bei der Spinne+


Nach dieser Begegnung mit der Fliege Puck war der kleinen Maja nicht
sonderlich froh zumute. Sie konnte sich unmglich denken, da Puck in
allem recht haben sollte, was sie ber den Menschen gesagt hatte und wie
sie sich zu ihm stellte. Maja dachte so ganz anders vom Menschen. Sie
hatte ein hohes und schnes Bild von ihm und strubte sich dagegen,
etwas Geringes und Lcherliches von ihm zu glauben. Aber sie wagte es
doch nicht, sich in seine Behausung zu begeben. Wie sollte sie wissen,
ob es ihm angenehm war, und um alles in der Welt wollte sie niemandem
zur Last fallen. Sie dachte noch einmal ber alles nach, was Kassandra
ihr erzhlt hatte: Die Menschen sind gut und weise, hatte sie ihr
gesagt. Sie sind sehr stark und mchtig, aber sie mibrauchen ihre
Krfte nicht, sondern berall, wo sie hinkommen, entsteht Ordnung und
Wohlstand. Sie sind dem Volk der Bienen wohlgesinnt, darum vertrauen wir
Bienen uns ihrem Schutz an und teilen unseren Honig mit ihnen. Sie
lassen uns genug fr den Winter und sorgen dafr, da der Frost und die
groe Schar der Feinde, die wir unter den Tieren haben, uns nicht stren
oder vernichten. Es gibt wenig freie Tiere in der Welt, die solch ein
Verhltnis von Freundschaft und freiwilliger Dienstbarkeit mit den
Menschen eingegangen sind. Du wirst immer wieder unter den Insekten
Stimmen hren, die dem Menschen Bses nachsagen. Hre nicht auf sie.
Wenn ein betrtes Bienenvolk sich einmal in die Wildnis begibt und sein
Heil ohne den Menschen versucht, geht es rasch zugrunde. Es gibt zu
viele Wesen, die Verlangen nach unserm Honig tragen, und oft ist ein
ganzer Staat ruchlos vernichtet worden, mit seinen Bauten und seiner
Brut, nur weil ein unvernnftiges Tier seine Begierde nach dem Honig
stillen wollte. So hatte ihr Kassandra damals erzhlt, und solange sich
Maja nicht vom Gegenteil berzeugt hatte, wollte sie an die Wahrheit
dieser Worte glauben.

Es war schon Nachmittag geworden, und die Sonne stand hinter den
Obstbumen eines groen Gemsegartens, den Maja durchflog. Die Bume
waren lngst verblht, aber die kleine Biene entsann sich noch gut, sie
alle in ihrem leuchtenden Glanz von unzhligen Blten gesehen zu haben,
die sich heller als das Licht und betrend rein und lieblich gegen den
blauen Himmel emporgehoben hatten. Der se Duft und der lichte Schimmer
hatten sie zu einer Seligkeit berauscht, die sie in ihrem Leben niemals
vergessen wollte.

Sie dachte nun im Dahinfliegen darber nach, da das alles wiederkommen
sollte, und ihr Herz wurde weit vor Glck ber die Herrlichkeit der
groen Erde, auf der sie leben durfte.

Am Ende des Gartens schimmerten die weien Sternenbschel des Jasmin,
mit ihren zarten gelben Angesichtern, mitten im Strahlenkranz von reinem
Wei. Der sanfte Wind trug ihr den sen Duft entgegen. Und gab es nicht
auch noch Linden, die in dieser Jahreszeit in voller Blte standen? Und
Maja dachte beglckt an die groen, ernsten Linden, in deren Wipfel bis
zuletzt das rtliche Glhen der Abendsonne stand.

Sie flog zwischen Brombeerranken hindurch, die schon grne Beeren
angesetzt hatten, aber auch noch Blten trugen. Als sie wieder empor
wollte, um zum Jasmin zu gelangen, legte sich pltzlich etwas
Fremdartiges ber ihre Stirn und ber ihre Schultern, ebenso rasch
bedeckte es die Flgel, so da sie wie gelhmt wurden und Maja in dem
seltsamen Wunder dieser fremden Erscheinung das Bewutsein hatte,
pltzlich in ihrem Flug gehemmt zu sein und das Gefhl, zu fallen,
kraftlos niederzufallen, als hielte eine heimliche, bse Gewalt ihre
Fhler, ihre Beine und ihre Flgel in unsichtbarer Gefangenschaft. Aber
sie fiel nicht. Obgleich sie ihre Flgel nicht mehr bewegen konnte,
schwebte sie doch, wunderbar weich und zart und nachgiebig hielt es sie,
hob sie ein wenig, senkte sie wieder und trieb sie hin und her, als
spielte ein sanfter Wind mit einem gelsten Blatt.

Die kleine Maja berkam ein Gefhl von Bengstigung, aber recht frchten
konnte sie sich noch nicht, da sie weder Schmerzen empfand, noch
eigentlich ein Unbehagen versprte. Nur seltsam war es, ganz seltsam,
und dahinter lauerte etwas Bses. Sie wollte doch sehn, da sie weiter
kam. Wenn sie sich recht anstrengte, so wrde es ihr sicher gelingen.

Da sah sie quer ber ihrer Brust einen unendlich feinen, dehnbaren
Silberfaden, und als sie rasch und in heiem Schreck danach griff, blieb
er an ihrer Hand hngen, klebte fest und lie sich nicht mehr lsen. Und
dort lief ein zweiter Silberfaden ber ihre Schulter, zog sich ber die
Flgel hin und verband sie miteinander, so da sie sie nicht mehr heben
konnte. Und dort und dort, berall in der Luft und ber ihren Krper hin
liefen diese hellen, glitzernden, klebrigen Fden.

Die kleine Maja schrie laut auf vor Entsetzen, denn nun hatte sie
erkannt, was ihr geschehn war und wo sie sich befand. Sie war im Netz
der Spinne.

Ihr Weinen und Rufen scholl laut und angstvoll in die stille sommerliche
Runde, in der der Sonnenschein auf goldgrnen Blttern blinkte, in der
Insekten hin und her flogen und Vgel sich durch die Luft warfen. Ganz
nah duftete der Jasmin im Blau. Dorthin hatte sie gewollt, nun war es
mit ihr zu Ende.

Ein kleiner blulicher Schmetterling, der braune Pnktchen, die wie
Kupfer schimmerten, auf seinen Flgeln hatte, kam ganz dicht an Maja
vorber.

Ach Arme, rief er, als er das Jammern der kleinen Maja hrte und sie
verzweifelt im Netz der Spinne zappeln sah. Mchte Ihnen der Tod leicht
werden, Sie Liebe. Ich kann Ihnen nicht helfen. Auch mich trifft es
einmal, vielleicht schon diese Nacht. Aber noch ist es schn fr mich.
Leben Sie wohl, vergessen Sie die Sonne nicht in Ihrem tiefen
Todesschlaf.

Und er schaukelte weiter, ganz betubt vom Blhn und von der Sonne und
von seiner Lebensseligkeit.

Der kleinen Maja strzten die Trnen aus den Augen, und sie verlor allen
Halt und jede Gefatheit. Hin und her stie sie sich mit ihren
gefesselten Flgeln und Beinchen, schrie und summte, so laut sie konnte,
und rief um Hilfe und wute nicht wen. Und dabei verwickelte sie sich
immer fester in das Netz. Ach, nun gingen ihr in ihrer groen Angst die
Warnungen Kassandras durch den Sinn: Hte dich vor dem Netz der Spinne,
in ihrer Gewalt erleiden wir den grausamsten Tod. Sie ist herzlos und
tckisch und lt niemanden wieder frei.

Ihre Todesangst wurde zur Verzweiflung, mit ihren letzten Krften machte
sie eine gewaltige Anstrengung, aber obgleich sie die Empfindung hatte,
als risse irgendwo eines der langen, strkeren Tragseile, in denen
das Netz hing, so sprte sie doch das furchtbare Verhngnis des
Spinnennetzes, das darin bestand, da es um so gefhrlicher wirkte,
je mehr man sich darin bewegte.

Als sie in vlliger Erschpfung einen Augenblick innehielt, sah sie
unter einem groen Brombeerblatt, ganz in ihrer Nhe, die Spinne sitzen.
Ihr Entsetzen war unbeschreiblich, als sie das groe Ungeheuer ganz
ernst und still wie zu einem Sprung geduckt unter dem Blatt hocken sah.
Die Spinne sah mit bsen funkelnden Augen auf die kleine Maja, in einer
boshaften Geduld und grauenhaft kaltbltig.

Maja stie einen lauten Schrei aus. Ihr war, als habe sie noch niemals
so voller Angst aufgeschrien. Schlimmer konnte auch der Tod selbst nicht
aussehen, als dieses graue, behaarte Ungetm mit seinem bsen Gebi und
den hochstehenden Beinen, in denen der plumpe Krper wie in einem
Gestell hockte. Und nun gleich wrde sie zustrmen, und mit ihrem Leben
war es zu Ende.

Da befiel Maja ein furchtbarer Zorn, wie sie ihn niemals gefhlt hatte.
Sie stie ihren hellen, bsen Kampfruf aus, den alle Tiere kennen und
frchten, und verga ihre Angst und ihr Herzeleid und war nur noch
darauf aus, ihr Leben so teuer als mglich zu verkaufen.

Sie werden Ihre Hinterlist mit dem Tode ben, schrie sie der Spinne
entgegen. Kommen Sie nur her, um mich zu tten, Sie werden erfahren,
was eine Biene vermag.

Die Spinne rhrte sich nicht. Es war wirklich auerordentlich unheimlich
und htte sicher auch grere Tiere gengstigt, als die kleine Maja
eines war.

Mit der Kraft ihres Zorns machte sie eine letzte verzweifelte
Anstrengung. Knack! Da ri ber ihr ein langer Faden, der das Netz an
einer Seite hielt. Es war sicher fr kleine Mcken oder Fliegen
berechnet und nicht fr so groe Insekten, wie es Bienen sind. Aber Maja
verwickelte sich nur noch rger.

Da glitt die Spinne mit einem Ruck nher, ganz dicht bis an die kleine
Maja heran, auf einem einzigen Faden, an dem sie mit den beweglichen
Beinen heranturnte, so da ihr Krper nach unten hing.

Was berechtigt Sie dazu, mir mein Netz zu zerstren? sagte sie mit
krchzender Stimme zu Maja. Was wollen Sie hier? Ist die Welt nicht
gro genug? Was stren Sie eine friedliche Einsiedlerin?

Das hatte die kleine Maja nicht erwartet. Nein, das wirklich nicht.

Es war ein Versehen, rief sie, und zitterte vor Glck und Hoffnung.
So hlich die Spinne auch war, so schien sie doch keine bsen Absichten
zu haben. Ich habe leider Ihr Netz nicht beachtet und habe mich
verwickelt. Ach, entschuldigen Sie.

Die Spinne kam etwas nher.

Sie sind ja eine ganz dralle kleine Person, sagte sie, und lie sich
abwechselnd erst mit dem einen, dann mit dem andern Bein etwas los. Der
Faden schwankte. Es war wirklich erstaunlich, da ein so dnner Faden
die groe Spinne trug.

Ach, helfen Sie mir los, bat Maja, ich will mich erkenntlich zeigen,
so gut ich kann.

Deshalb bin ich gekommen, sagte die Spinne und lchelte merkwrdig.
Trotz dieses Lchelns sah sie heimtckisch und bse aus. Sie zerstren
mir ja mit Ihrem Gezappel das ganze Netz. Wenn Sie einen Augenblick
stillhalten, will ich Sie befreien.

Vielen, vielen Dank, rief Maja.

Die Spinne war nun ganz dicht neben ihr. Sie berzeugte sich genau, wie
fest Maja sich schon verwickelt hatte.

Wie ist es mit dem Stachel? fragte sie.

Nein, wie bse und garstig sah sie aus. Maja schttelte es ordentlich
vor Entsetzen, wenn sie daran dachte, da die Spinne sie nun berhren
wollte. Aber sie sagte so freundlich, als sie vermochte:

Machen Sie sich wegen meines Stachels keine Sorge. Ich werde ihn
einziehn und dann verletzt sich niemand daran.

Das bitte ich mir aus, sagte die Spinne. Also! Aufgepat! Still
gehalten! Es ist wirklich schade um mein Netz.

Die kleine Maja hielt still. Sie fhlte sich pltzlich herumgewirbelt,
immer auf demselben Fleck, so da ihr ganz schwindlig zumute wurde. Sie
mute die Augen schlieen, und ihr wurde bel. -- Aber was war das?!
Entsetzt ri sie die Augen auf. Sie war ber und ber eingewickelt von
einem ganz frischen klebrigen Faden, den die Spinne bei sich gehabt
haben mute.

O du lieber Gott, sagte die kleine Maja leise und mit bebender Stimme.
Mehr sagte sie nicht. Nun war es zu Ende. Nun erkannte sie die
Hinterlist der Spinne. Nun erst war sie gefangen, nun gab es kein
Entrinnen mehr. Sie konnte keinen Flgel, kein Glied ihres Krpers mehr
bewegen.

Ihr Zorn und ihre Wut waren verflogen, nur eine groe Traurigkeit kam
ber ihr Herz. Ich habe nicht gewut, da es soviel Schlechtigkeit und
Bosheit in der Welt gibt, dachte sie. Nun kommt meine tiefe Todesnacht,
leb wohl, helle Sonne, lebt wohl, meine lieben Gefhrten, warum hab
ich euch verlassen? Lebt alle wohl. Ich mu sterben.

Die Spinne sa vorsichtig ein wenig beiseit. Sie frchtete sich immer
noch vor dem Stachel der kleinen Maja.

Nun? fragte sie spttisch, wie befinden Sie sich, meine Kleine?

Maja war zu stolz, dieser Falschen noch zu antworten. Nur nach einer
Weile, als sie glaubte, ihre Traurigkeit nicht mehr ertragen zu knnen,
sagte sie:

Tten Sie mich bitte gleich.

I wo, sagte die Spinne und verknotete ein paar zerrissene Fden,
meinen Sie, ich wre so dumm wie Sie? Sterben tun Sie sowieso, wenn man
Sie nur lange genug hngen lt, und ich kann Ihnen Ihr Blut auch noch
aussaugen, wenn Sie nicht mehr stechen knnen. Es ist nur schade, da
Sie nicht mehr sehen knnen, wie Sie mein schnes Netz zugerichtet
haben, dann wrden Sie Ihren Tod wenigstens als gerecht empfinden.

Sie lie sich blitzschnell bis an die Erde nieder, legte das Ende des
neugesponnenen Fadens um einen kleinen Stein und zog es fest an.

Dann kam sie wieder herauf, ergriff das feste Seil, an dem die
eingewickelte Maja hing, und schleppte es langsam mit ihrer Gefangenen
fort.

Sie kommen in den Schatten, meine Liebe, sagte sie, damit die Sonne
Sie nicht austrocknet. Da oben wirken Sie mir auch zu abschreckend auf
andere Leutchen, die nicht aufpassen knnen. Und die Grasmcken kommen
auch zuweilen auf den Gedanken, mein Netz zu plndern. Und damit Sie
wissen, mit wem Sie zu tun haben: Ich heie Thekla, von der Familie der
Kreuzspinnen. Ihren Namen brauchen Sie mir nicht zu nennen, er ist
gleichgltig, ein fetter Bissen sind Sie jedenfalls.

Da hing nun die kleine Maja tief im Schattendunkel des Brombeerbusches
dicht ber der Erde, der Grausamkeit der Spinne hilflos berliefert, die
vorhatte, sie langsam verhungern zu lassen. Da sie mit dem Kpfchen nach
unten hing, fhlte sie bald, da sie diese schreckliche Lage nicht lange
aushalten wrde. Sie wimmerte leise vor sich hin, und ihre Hilferufe
wurden immer schwcher. Wer auch sollte ihr helfen? Die Ihren daheim
wuten nichts von dem Leid, das ihr widerfahren war, und konnten nicht
zu ihrer Befreiung herbeieilen.

Da hrte sie pltzlich unter sich im Gras jemanden mimutig brummen, und
sie verstand die Worte:

Ich komme, das gengt fr alle, um Platz zu machen!

Ihr gengstigtes Herz begann strmisch zu klopfen, denn sie erkannte an
der Stimme sogleich den Mistkfer Kurt, den sie damals bei der Grille
Iffi belauscht hatte, und dem sie geholfen hatte, sich aus seiner bsen
Lage wieder aufzurichten.

Kurt, rief sie, so laut sie konnte, lieber Kurt!

Machen Sie Platz, rief der blaue Kurt, der es in der Tat war.

Ich bin Ihnen ja nicht im Weg, Kurt, rief Maja, ach, ich hnge hier
ber Ihnen, die Spinne hat mich gefangen.

Aber wer sind Sie denn? fragte Kurt. Ich bin sehr bekannt, berall,
das werden Sie jetzt voraussichtlich zugeben?

Ich bin die Biene Maja. O bitte, bitte, helfen Sie mir!

Maja? Maja? -- Ach, ich erinnere mich. Sie lernten mich vor einigen
Wochen kennen. Sapperlot, Sie sind allerdings in einer fatalen Lage, das
mu ich zugeben, da ist freilich meine Hilfe ntig. Da ich
augenblicklich Zeit habe, werde ich sie Ihnen nicht verweigern.

O lieber Kurt! Knnen Sie diese Fden zerreien?

Diese Fden? Wollen Sie mich beleidigen? Kurt schlug mit der Hand auf
die Muskeln seines Arms. Sehen Sie her, Kleine, das ist so gut wie
reinster Stahl! So was an Kraft finden Sie so leicht nicht wieder. Ich
nehme andere Dinge auf mich, als ein paar Spinnweben zu zerschmettern.
Sie werden Ihr Wunder erleben.

Er kroch an dem Blatt empor, ergriff den Faden, an dem die kleine Maja
hing, hielt sich daran fest und lie dann das Blatt los. Der Faden ri
und beide fielen zu Boden.

Das wre der Anfang, sagte Kurt. Aber Sie zittern ja, kleine Maja,
ach Arme, wie bla Sie sind. Wer wird sich denn so vor dem Tode
frchten? Dem Tod mu man ruhig ins Auge sehn, wie ich es zu tun pflege.
So, nun werde ich Sie auspacken.

Es war der kleinen Biene unmglich, ein Wort zu sprechen. Helle
Freudentrnen liefen ihr ber die Wangen. Sie sollte frei werden, sie
sollte wieder im Sonnenschein fliegen, wohin sie wollte, sie sollte
leben.

Da sah sie ber sich die Spinne die Brombeerranke herunterkommen.

Kurt, schrie sie, die Spinne kommt!

Kurt lie sich nicht stren, er lachte nur vor sich hin. Er war
allerdings ein auerordentlich starker Kfer.

Die berlegt es sich noch, sagte er ruhig.

Aber da erklang schon die bse krchzende Stimme ber ihnen:

Ruber! Zu Hilfe! Man beraubt mich. Was haben Sie dicker Lmmel mit
meiner Beute zu schaffen?!

Regen Sie sich nicht auf, Madame, sagte Kurt. Ich werde mich wohl
noch mit meiner Freundin unterhalten drfen. Wenn Sie noch ein Wort
sagen, was mir nicht gefllt, so zerreie ich Ihnen Ihr ganzes Netz.
Nun? Warum sind Sie denn pltzlich so schweigsam?

Ich bin eine geschlagene Frau, antwortete die Spinne.

Das tut nichts zur Sache, meinte Kurt. Jetzt machen Sie, da Sie
weiterkommen!

Die Spinne warf einen haerfllten und giftigen Blick auf Kurt, aber
dann sah sie zu ihrem Netz empor und berlegte sich die Sache. Langsam
kehrte sie um und schalt leise und grimmig vor sich hin. Da ntzte
allerdings kein Bi und kein Stich, gegen einen solchen Panzer, wie Kurt
ihn trug, war nicht anzukommen.

Sie klagte auf das heftigste ber die Ungerechtigkeit der Umwelt und
versteckte sich fr alle Flle vorlufig in einem welken Blatt, von dem
aus sie ihr Netz bersehen konnte.

Inzwischen war Kurt unten mit der Befreiung der kleinen Maja zu Ende.
Er hatte die Gewebe zerrissen, ihre Flgel und Beinchen befreit, und
den Rest konnte sie nun selbst bernehmen. Sie putzte sich froh und
glcklich, wenn auch nur langsam, weil sie sehr geschwcht war von ihrer
Angst und immer noch zitterte.

Sie mssen es vergessen, sagte Kurt, dann hrt das Zittern auf.
Versuchen Sie mal, ob Sie fliegen knnen.

Maja erhob sich mit leisem Summen, es ging vortrefflich, und sie
erkannte zu ihrer Freude, da keins ihrer Glieder beschdigt war. Sie
flog langsam bis zu den Jasminbschen hinauf, trank gierig von dem
duftenden Honigsaft, den sie in groer Flle fand, und kehrte dann zu
Kurt zurck, der das Brombeergebsch verlassen hatte und im Gras sa.

Ich danke Ihnen von ganzem Herzen, sagte Maja, tief ergriffen vom
Glck ihrer neuen Freiheit.

Es ist schon sehr dankenswert, was ich getan habe, meinte Kurt, aber
ich bin immer so. Nun fliegen Sie nur weiter. Ich wrde Ihnen raten,
sich heute abend frh aufs Ohr zu legen. Haben Sie weit bis nach Haus?

Nein, antwortete Maja, nur ein paar Minuten, ich wohne am Buchenwald.
Leben Sie wohl, Kurt, ich werde Sie nie vergessen. Nie will ich Sie
vergessen in meinem ganzen Leben.




Achtes Kapitel

+Die Wanze und der Schmetterling+


Die Gefangenschaft bei der Spinne hatte der kleinen Maja doch zu denken
gegeben. Sie beschlo vorsichtiger zu werden, und sich knftig nicht
mehr allzu rasch einzulassen. Wenn Kassandra sie auch ber die grten
Gefahren, die den Bienen drohen, unterrichtet hatte, so war doch die
Welt zu gro, und es gab zu vielerlei Mglichkeiten, als da man nicht
allen Grund gehabt htte, nachdenklich zu werden. Besonders des Abends,
wenn die Dmmerung ber das Land niedersank, kamen der kleinen Biene
mancherlei Erwgungen in ihrer Einsamkeit; schien aber am andern Morgen
die Sonne, so verga sie fr gewhnlich die Hlfte ihrer Besorgnisse und
lie sich durch ihr Verlangen nach Erlebnissen aufs neue in den bunten
Lebensstrudel hinaustreiben.

Eines Tages begegnete ihr in einem Himbeergebsch ein merkwrdiges Tier.
Es war eckig und seltsam platt, hatte aber eine hbsche Zeichnung auf
seinem Rckenschild, von dem man nicht recht sagen konnte, ob es Flgel
waren oder nicht. Das seltsame kleine Ungeheuer sa ganz still mit
halbgeschlossenen Augen auf einem Blatt im Schatten im Duft der
Himbeeren und schien nachzudenken.

Maja wollte wissen, was das fr ein Tier war. Sie flog ganz in die Nhe,
setzte sich auf ein benachbartes Blatt und grte. Die Fremde antwortete
nicht.

Sie! sagte Maja und stie das Blatt der Fremden an, so da es etwas
wackelte. Da ffnete das platte Geschpf langsam ein Auge, schaute Maja
damit an und sagte:

Eine Biene. Nun ja, es gibt viele Bienen. Und dann machte es sein Auge
wieder zu.

Wie eigenartig, dachte die kleine Maja, aber sie beschlo doch, hinter
das Geheimnis der Fremden zu kommen. Nun war sie ihr erst recht
interessant geworden, wie Leute es oft werden, die nichts von uns wissen
wollen. Maja versuchte es mit etwas Honig. Ich habe reichlich, sagte
sie, wenn ich Ihnen vielleicht etwas anbieten darf?

Die Fremde machte ihr Auge wieder auf und schaute Maja eine Weile
sinnend an. Was wird sie diesmal sagen, dachte die Biene. Aber es kam
keine Antwort, nur das Auge schlo sich wieder, und die Fremde blieb
still sitzen, ganz fest an das Blatt geschmiegt, so da man nichts von
ihren Beinen sah und fast glauben konnte, es htte sie jemand mit dem
Daumen so fest an das Blatt gepret, da sie darber platt geworden war.

Maja merkte nun wohl, da die Fremde nichts von ihr wissen wollte, aber
wie es einem so geht, man mchte nicht gern so unhflich verabschiedet
werden, am wenigsten ohne zu seinem Ziel gelangt zu sein. Das wre ja
gradezu eine Blamage gewesen, und die erlebt niemand gern.

Wer immer Sie sein mgen, rief Maja, merken Sie sich, da man in der
Insektenwelt einen Gru zu erwidern pflegt, ganz besonders aber dann,
wenn er von einer Biene geboten wird.

Es blieb ganz still, und nichts rhrte sich. Die Fremde machte ihr Auge
nicht mehr auf.

Dies Tier ist krank, dachte sich Maja. Wie unangenehm, an einem so
schnen Tage krank zu sein, darum sitzt es auch im Schatten. Sie flog
auf das Blatt der Fremden und setzte sich neben sie.

Meine Liebe, fragte sie freundlich, was fehlt Ihnen?

Da begann das fremde Tier sich fortzubewegen, auf ganz absonderliche
Art, als ob es von einer unsichtbaren Hand geschoben wrde. Es hat keine
Beine, dachte Maja, deshalb ist es so verstimmt. Am Stiel des Blattes
machte es halt, und nun sah Maja zu ihrer Verwunderung, da es einen
kleinen braunen Tropfen zurckgelassen hatte. Wie apart, dachte sie,
aber da verbreitete sich pltzlich ein furchtbarer Geruch in der Luft,
der von diesem braunen Tropfen ausging. Die Biene wurde beinahe betubt,
so eindringlich und widerwrtig war dieser Geruch, und so rasch sie
konnte, flog sie empor und setzte sich auf eine Himbeere, hielt sich die
Nase zu und schttelte sich vor Aufregung und Entsetzen.

Ja, warum lassen Sie sich mit einer Wanze ein, sagte jemand ber ihr
und lachte.

Lachen Sie nicht! rief Maja.

Sie sah sich um. ber ihr auf einem feinen schaukelnden Trieb des
Himbeerbusches sa ein weier Schmetterling. Er klappte seine groen
Flgel langsam auf und wieder zu, lautlos und von der Sonne beglckt.
Seine Flgel hatten schwarze Ecken, auch waren mitten darauf runde
schwarze Punkte, auf jedem Flgel einer, so da es zusammen vier waren.
Maja hatte schon viele Schmetterlinge gesehen, aber sie hatte noch
keinen kennengelernt. Vor Entzcken ber seine Schnheit verga sie
ihren Verdru.

Ach, sagte sie, Sie haben vielleicht ganz recht, wenn Sie lachen. War
das eine Wanze?

Der Schmetterling nickte. Aber sicher war es eine, sagte er, immer
noch lchelnd, mit denen lt man sich nicht ein. Sie sind wohl noch
sehr jung?

Nun, meinte Maja, das will ich nicht grade behaupten. Ich habe groe
Erfahrungen gemacht. Aber so ein Tier ist mir noch nicht vorgekommen.
Wer tut denn so was?

Der Schmetterling mute wieder lachen.

Die Wanzen, erzhlte er, sind gern allein, und weil sie im
allgemeinen nicht sehr beliebt sind, versuchen sie sich auf diese Art
bemerkbar zu machen. Man wrde sie sonst wahrscheinlich bald vergessen,
aber auf diese Art denkt man an sie. Das wollen sie jedenfalls.

Wie schn Ihre Flgel sind, sagte Maja, so leicht und wei. Darf ich
mich Ihnen vorstellen? Ich heie Maja, vom Volk der Bienen.

Der Schmetterling legte seine Flgel zusammen, so da es aussah, als
habe er nur einen, sie standen grade in die Luft empor. Er verbeugte
sich ein wenig und sagte nur ganz kurz:

Fritz.

So hie er. Maja konnte sich nicht satt sehen an seinen Flgeln.
Fliegen Sie mal, sagte sie.

Soll ich fortfliegen?

O nein, antwortete Maja, ich mchte nur sehen, wie Ihre groen weien
Flgel sich in der blauen Luft bewegen, aber ich kann es ja auch spter
noch sehen. Wo wohnen Sie?

Ich habe keine bestimmte Wohnung, sagte Fritz, man hat zu viel
Umstnde damit. Seit ich ein Schmetterling bin, ist das Leben erst
wirklich schn. Frher, als ich eine Raupe war, kam man den ganzen Tag
nicht von den Kohlblttern herunter, fra und zankte sich.

Wie meinen Sie das? fragte Maja erstaunt.

Frher war ich eine Raupe, sagte Fritz.

Ausgeschlossen, rief Maja.

Na, hren Sie mal, meinte Fritz und richtete seine beiden Fhler grade
auf Maja, das wei doch jeder, das wei sogar der Mensch.

Die kleine Maja wurde ganz befangen. Ob so etwas in der Welt mglich
war?

Da mssen Sie sich erst deutlicher erklren, sagte sie zweifelnd, so
ohne weiteres werde ich das nicht glauben. Das knnen Sie nicht
verlangen.

Der Schmetterling setzte sich neben die Biene auf den kleinen
schwankenden Zweig des Busches, und sie schaukelten nebeneinander im
Morgenwind. Er erzhlte ihr, wie er eines Tages als Raupe begonnen habe
sich einzuspinnen, bis nichts mehr kenntlich war als eine unscheinbare
braune Hlle, die Puppe genannt wrde. Und nach wenig Wochen, fuhr er
fort, erwachte ich aus meinem dunklen Schlaf und zerbrach meine Hlle.
Ich kann Ihnen niemals schildern, Maja, wie einem nach so einer Zeit
zumute ist, wenn man pltzlich die Sonne wieder sieht. Mir war zumute,
als verginge ich in einem warmen goldenen Meer, und ich habe mein Leben
so geliebt, da ich Herzklopfen bekam.

Das kann ich verstehn, sagte Maja, es ist mir ebenso gegangen, als
ich zum erstenmal aus unserer dsteren Stadt in den hellen Bltenduft
hinausflog. Und die kleine Biene wurde einen Augenblick ganz still,
weil sie an ihren ersten Ausflug denken mute. Aber dann wollte sie
wissen, wie die groen Flgel des Schmetterlings in der kleinen Hlle
htten wachsen knnen.

Fritz erklrte es ihr.

Sie sind leicht und fein zusammengelegt, wie die Bltenbltter einer
Blume in einer Knospe. Wenn es hell und warm wird, mu die Blume sich
ffnen, sie kann nicht anders, und ihre Bltter entfalten sich. So ist
es auch mir mit meinen Flgeln gegangen. Niemand kann widerstehn, wenn
die Sonne scheint.

Doch, sagte Maja, das ist wahr. Nachdenklich betrachtete sie den
weien Schmetterling, wie er im goldenen Morgenlicht sa, gegen den
blauen Himmel.

Man sagt uns oft nach, wir seien leichtsinnig, sagte Fritz, aber im
Grunde sind wir nur glcklich. Sie glauben nicht, wie ernst ich oft ber
das Leben nachdenke.

Was haben Sie alles ausgedacht? fragte Maja.

ber die Zukunft denke ich nach, sagte der Schmetterling, sie ist
sehr interessant. Aber nun will ich fliegen, die Wiesen am Berghang
stehn voll Glockenblumen und Schafgarbe, alles blht dort; ich mchte
dabei sein, wissen Sie.

Maja verstand das gut, und sie verabschiedeten sich und flogen nach
verschiedenen Seiten davon, der weie Schmetterling lautlos und
schaukelnd, als trge ihn der sanfte Wind, und die kleine Maja mit ihrem
sorgenvollen Summen, das wir an schnen Tagen ber den Blumen hren und
nie vergessen knnen, wenn wir an den Sommer denken.




Neuntes Kapitel

+Hannibals Kampf mit dem Menschen+


In der Nhe der Baumhhle, in der die kleine Maja ihre Sommerwohnung
aufgeschlagen, hatte sich in der Rinde der Kiefer der Borkkfer Fridolin
mit seiner Familie angesiedelt. Er war ein arbeitsamer und ernster Mann,
der viel Sorgfalt auf die Fortpflanzung seiner Familie legte und es auf
diesem Gebiet zu hbschen Erfolgen gebracht hatte. Er sah mit Stolz auf
etwa fnfzig regsame Shne zurck, die alle zu den besten Hoffnungen
berechtigten. Sie gruben sich unter der Baumrinde jeder seinen kleinen
gewundenen Kanal und fhlten sich darin wohl.

Meine Frau hat es so eingerichtet, da keiner dem anderen in die Quere
kommt, sagte Fridolin zu Maja. Meine Shne kennen sich noch nicht,
ihre Lebenswege gehn alle nach verschiedenen Richtungen.

Maja kannte Fridolin schon lange. Sie wute wohl, da die Menschen ihn
und sein Geschlecht nicht eben liebten, aber sie selbst fand sein Wesen
und seine Gesinnungsart sehr liebenswrdig und hatte bisher nicht Grund
gehabt, ihn zu meiden. Morgens, wenn der Wald noch schlief und die Sonne
noch nicht aufgegangen war, hrte sie oft sein feines Pochen und Bohren,
ganz leise klang es wie ein feines Rieseln, oder als atmete der Baum im
Schlaf. Spter fand sie dann den dnnen braunen Staub, den er aus seinem
Gang geschafft hatte.

Eines Morgens kam er frh zu ihr, wie er es oft tat, und erkundigte sich
danach, ob Maja gut geschlafen habe.

Fliegen Sie heute nicht? fragte er.

Nein, sagte Maja, es ist zu windig.

Das war es in der Tat. Der Wald brauste und schttelte seine ste wild
und aufgeregt, und die Bltter an seinen Zweigen sahen aus, als ob sie
fortflattern wollten. Jedesmal, wenn wieder ein Windsto kam, wurde es
etwas heller umher, und man hatte den Eindruck, als wren die Bume um
vieles kahler. In der Kiefer, auf der Fridolin und Maja lebten, pfiffen
die Stimmen des Windes mit ganz hellem Sausen, es klang, als ob der Baum
erregt und zornig sei.

Fridolin seufzte. Ich habe die ganze Nacht gearbeitet, erzhlte er,
was bleibt einem brig? Man mu sehn, da man etwas erreicht. Ich bin
auch mit dieser Kiefer nicht recht zufrieden, ich htte mich an eine
Tanne heranmachen sollen. Er trocknete sich die Stirn und lchelte
nachsichtig.

Wie geht es Ihren Kindern? fragte Maja freundlich.

Fridolin dankte. Ich berseh die Sache nicht mehr recht, sagte er
zgernd, aber ich gebe mich der Hoffnung hin, da alle gedeihn.

Wie er so dasa, ein kleiner brauner Mann, mit seinem Brustschild, das
aussah wie ein viel zu groer Kopf, und seinen kurzen, etwas gestutzten
Flgeldecken, fand Maja, da er beinahe etwas komisch wirkte, aber sie
wute wohl, da er ein gefhrlicher Kfer war und den mchtigen
Waldbumen groen Schaden tun konnte. Fiel sein Volk in groen Scharen
ber einen Baum her, so war es bald um seine grnen Nadeln geschehen, er
mute welken und sterben und hatte keine Mittel, sich gegen die kleinen
Ruber zu wehren, die ihm seine Rinde zerstrten, durch die der Saft in
die Wipfel steigt. Man erzhlte, da seinem Volke schon ganze Wlder zum
Opfer gefallen seien. Maja betrachtete ihn nachdenklich, und ihr ward
ganz feierlich zumute, wenn sie bedachte, wie bedeutungsvoll und mchtig
dies kleine Tier werden konnte.

Da seufzte Fridolin und sagte bekmmert. Ach, das Leben wre schn,
wenn es keine Spechte gbe.

Ja, ja, nickte Maja, der Specht, das ist wahr, er frit auf, was er
findet.

Wenn es nur das wre, meinte Fridolin, wenn leichtsinnige Leute, die
sich auen auf der Rinde umhertreiben, ihm als Beute zufielen, wrde ich
sagen: Gut, schlielich will auch ein Specht leben. Aber ich finde es
unverantwortlich, da dieser Vogel einen bis unter die Rinde verfolgt,
bis in die Schlupfwinkel und bis tief in unsere Gnge hinein.

Nein, sagte Maja, das kann er nicht. Dazu ist er zu gro, soviel ich
wei.

Fridolin sah Maja mit hochgezogenen Brauen an und nickte ein paarmal
gewichtig mit dem Kopf. Es machte ihm offenbar Spa, da er etwas besser
wute.

Zu gro? fragte er, wer spricht von seiner Gre? Nein, meine Liebe,
seine Gre ist es nicht, die uns besorgt macht, sondern seine Zunge.

Maja machte groe Augen, und nun erfuhr sie von Fridolin, da der Specht
eine lange dnne Zunge hat, rund wie ein Wurm, und spitz und klebrig.
Zehnmal so lang, wie ich es bin, kann er sie mindestens
herausstrecken, rief der Borkkfer und schwenkte den Arm. Man denkt,
jetzt ist sie zu Ende, da wird sie noch lnger. Er schiebt sie,
gewissenlos wie er ist, tief in alle Spalten und Risse der Rinde und
denkt: vielleicht sitzt jemand darin. Sogar in unsere Kanle dringt
diese Zunge ein, Gott wei es, und was mit ihr in Berhrung kommt, klebt
daran fest und wird herausgezogen.

Ich bin nicht feige, sagte Maja, bestimmt nicht, aber diese Tatsache
macht mich doch recht besorgt.

Ach, Sie mit Ihrem Stachel haben es gut, meinte Fridolin nicht ohne
Neid. Jeder besinnt sich, eh er sich in die Zunge stechen lt, fragen
Sie, wen Sie wollen. Aber was soll unsereiner sagen? Meine Cousine hat
es durchgemacht. Wir hatten vorher einen kleinen Streit wegen meiner
Frau gehabt, ich wei noch alles genau, sie war bei uns auf Besuch und
kannte die Wohnungsverhltnisse noch nicht so recht. Mit einmal hren
wir den Specht scharren und klopfen, es war einer von den kleineren
Sorten. Er mu grade bei unserem Bau angefangen haben, sonst hrt man
ihn gewhnlich schon vorher und bringt sich in Sicherheit. Pltzlich
hre ich meine bedauernswerte Cousine aus dem Dunkel schrein: Fridolin,
ich klebe! Ich vernahm noch ein verzweifeltes Zappeln, dann wurde es
still, und der Specht hmmerte schon nebenan. Um meine Cousine war es
geschehn, sie war bereits verschlungen. Sie hie Agathe.

Fhlen Sie mal, wie mein Herz klopft, sagte Maja leise, Sie htten es
nicht so rasch erzhlen sollen. Was doch alles passiert in der Welt!
Und die kleine Biene dachte an ihre eigenen Erlebnisse, die zurcklagen,
und an alles, was ihr vielleicht noch begegnen knnte.

Da fing pltzlich Fridolin an zu lachen.

Maja sah sich berrascht nach ihm um.

Passen Sie auf, rief er, jetzt kommt der Richtige den Baum herauf,
das ist einer, sage ich Ihnen. Nun, Sie werden ja sehn.

Maja folgte seinen Blicken und sah ein merkwrdiges Tier langsam den
Baum emporklimmen. Sie hatte niemals fr mglich gehalten, da es solche
Tiere gab. Aber grer als ihr Erstaunen war anfangs ihre Angst, und sie
fragte Fridolin hastig, ob man sich verbergen mte.

Kein Gedanke, sagte der Borkkfer, bleiben Sie getrost sitzen und
begren Sie den Herrn hflich. Er ist sehr gelehrt und hat wirklich
ernste Kenntnisse, dabei ist er gutherzig und bescheiden und wie alle
Leute, die so beschaffen sind, etwas komisch. Schauen Sie, was er tut!

Wahrscheinlich denkt er nach, meinte Maja, die nicht aus dem Erstaunen
herauskam.

Er kmpft gegen den Wind, sagte Fridolin und lachte, wenn ihm nur
seine Beine nicht durcheinandergeraten.

Sind denn diese langen Fden wirklich seine Beine, fragte Maja mit
groen Augen. So was hab ich nie gesehn.

Inzwischen war der Fremde nher gekommen, und Maja sah ihn genauer.
Eigentlich sah es aus, als kme er durch die Luft, so hoch hing sein
kleiner, rundlicher Krper in den ungeheuer langen Beinen, die wie ein
fadendnnes, bewegliches Gestell, weit von ihm ab, nach allen Seiten hin
Halt suchten. Er schritt vorsichtig und tastend voran, dabei schwankte
das braune Kgelchen seines Krpers bald hher hinauf, bald wieder
hinab. Die Beine waren so lang und dnn, da ein einzelnes sicher den
Krper nicht htte tragen knnen, er brauchte sie unbedingt alle
zusammen, und da sie in der Mitte geknickt waren, berragten sie ihn
hoch bis in die Luft hinein.

Maja schlug die Hnde zusammen.

Nein so was! rief sie. Aber htten Sie fr mglich gehalten, da so
zarte Beine, dnn wie Haare, so beweglich und ntzlich sein knnen, da
man sie wirklich gebrauchen kann, und da sie wissen, was sie tun
sollen? Ich finde, das ist ein Wunder, Fridolin.

Ach was, sagte der Borkkfer, wenn etwas komisch ist, so lacht man,
damit basta.

Ich habe aber keine Lust dazu, antwortete Maja, oft lacht man ber
etwas, und spter stellt sich heraus, da man es nur nicht verstanden
hat.

Da war der Fremde herangekommen, er schaute von der Hhe seiner Beine,
aus all den spitzen Dreiecken heraus, auf Maja nieder und sagte: Guten
Morgen! Ein rechter Brausewind, meine zwei Herrschaften, ein Zuglftlein
recht derber Art, nicht wahr, oder -- wie? Meinten Sie vielleicht etwas
anderes? Und er hielt sich fest, so gut er konnte.

Fridolin verbarg sein Lachen, aber die kleine Maja antwortete hflich,
das sei auch ihre Meinung, deshalb sei sie heute nicht ausgeflogen. Dann
stellte sie sich vor. Der Fremde schielte durch seine Knie hindurch auf
sie nieder.

Maja, vom Volk der Bienen, wiederholte er, das freut mich aufrichtig,
ich habe viel von den Bienen gehrt. Ich mu Ihnen gestehn, da ich
immer etwas in Verlegenheit gerate, wenn ich mich jemandem vorstellen
soll, denn unsere sehr verbreitete Familie ist unter den verschiedensten
Namen bekannt. Man nennt uns Weberknechte, Schneider oder Schuster.
Jedenfalls gehre ich zur Gattung der Spinnen, und mein Rufname ist
Hannibal.

Die Namen der Spinnen haben einen bsen Klang bei allen kleineren
Insekten, Maja konnte ihren Schreck nicht ganz verbergen, zumal sie
ihrer Gefangenschaft bei der Spinne Thekla gedachte; aber Hannibal
schien nichts davon zu merken. Sie dachte, wenn es sein mu, flieg ich,
da kann er mir nachschauen, Flgel hat er nicht, und sein Netz ist
anderswo.

Ich bin in Gedanken, sehr in Gedanken, sagte Hannibal, wenn Sie
erlauben, trete ich etwas nher, dort hinter dem groen Ast bin ich
geschtzt.

Bitte schn, sagte Maja und machte Platz. Fridolin verabschiedete
sich, aber die kleine Biene wollte nun doch gerne wissen, was es mit
Hannibal fr eine Bewandtnis htte. Was es doch alles fr Tiere in der
Welt gibt, dachte sie, immer wieder entdeckt man irgendein neues.

Der Wind hatte etwas nachgelassen, und die Sonne schien durch die
Baumzweige. Irgendwo unten im Buschwerk stimmte ein Rotkehlchen sein
Lied an und erfllte den Wald mit Glck. Maja konnte es auf einem Zweig
sitzen sehen, sie sah, wie die Kehle sich beim Singen bewegte, und der
Vogel hatte sein Kpfchen emporgerichtet gegen das Licht.

Wenn ich doch singen knnte, sagte die kleine Maja, so wie dort das
Rotkehlchen, ich setzte mich auf eine Blume und tte es den ganzen Tag.

Dabei wrde etwas Nettes herauskommen, meinte Hannibal, Sie mit Ihrem
Gesumm.

Der Vogel sieht so glcklich aus, sagte die Biene.

Sie sind eine phantastische Person, meinte der Weberknecht. Wenn alle
Tiere sich etwas anderes wnschten, als sie knnen, so wrde bald die
Welt auf dem Kopf stehen. Denken Sie sich, ein Rotkehlchen glaubte, es
mte partout einen Stachel haben, oder eine Ziege wollte herumfliegen
und Honig sammeln. Dann kme am Ende noch der Frosch und wnschte sich
solche Beine, wie ich sie habe.

Maja lachte.

Nein, das meine ich nicht, sagte sie, aber ich denke es mir
wunderschn, alle Wesen so glcklich machen zu knnen, wie dieser Vogel
es durch seinen Gesang kann. Aber was ist denn das, rief sie pltzlich
in groer Verwunderung, Herr, Sie haben ja ein Bein zuviel. Sie haben
sieben Beine.

Hannibal runzelte die Stirn und schaute unwillig vor sich hin.

Jetzt haben Sie es also glcklich doch gemerkt, sagte er verstimmt.
Allerdings habe ich kein Bein zuviel, sondern eins zuwenig.

Ja, haben Sie denn sonst acht Beine? fragte Maja erstaunt.

Wenn Sie erlauben, meinte Hannibal, wir Spinnen haben acht Beine. Wir
brauchen sie, und auch sonst -- es ist vornehmer. Mir ist eins abhanden
gekommen, schade um das Bein, aber schlielich hilft man sich, so gut
man kann.

Es mu sehr unangenehm sein, ein Bein zu verlieren, sagte Maja
teilnehmend.

Hannibal sttzte das Kinn in die Hand und stellte seine Beine so, da es
schwer war, sie zu berzhlen.

Ich werde Ihnen mitteilen, sagte er, wie es gekommen ist. Natrlich
ist der Mensch dabei im Spiel, wie gewhnlich, wenn etwas passiert.
Unsereiner sieht sich vor, aber der Mensch ist unvorsichtig und greift
mitunter zu, als ob man ein Stck Holz wre. Soll ich Ihnen erzhlen,
wie sich dieser beklagenswerte Vorfall zugetragen hat?

Ach bitte, sagte Maja und setzte sich zurecht, das wre mir sehr
interessant. Sie haben sicher ungemein viel erfahren.

Das ist richtig, sagte Hannibal, jetzt passen Sie auf. Unser
Geschlecht gehrt zu den Nachtvlkern, darber werden Sie unterrichtet
sein. Ich lebte damals in einem grnen Gartenhaus, das auen mit Efeu
bewachsen war und in dem sich manche zerbrochene Fensterscheibe befand,
so da ich bequem ein und aus konnte. Wenn es dunkel wurde, kam der
Mensch durch den Garten, trug seine knstliche Sonne, die er Lampe
nennt, in der einen Hand, in der anderen eine Flasche und unter dem Arm
Papier, auerdem hatte er noch eine kleine Flasche in der Tasche. Er
stellte alles auf den Tisch und fing an nachzudenken, weil er seine
Ansichten auf das Papier schreiben wollte. Sie werden sicher schon
Papier gefunden haben, im Wald oder im Garten. Das Schwarze darauf hat
der Mensch sich ausgedacht.

Fabelhaft, sagte Maja ganz glcklich, da sie so viel erfahren sollte.

Zu diesem Zweck, erklrte Hannibal weiter, braucht der Mensch seine
beiden Flaschen. In die kleine steckt er einen Holzstab, aus der groen
trinkt er. Je mehr er trinkt, um so besser geht es voran. Er schreibt
natrlich ber uns, alles was er wei, und ist sehr eifrig, aber viel
kommt nicht dabei heraus, denn der Mensch hat bisher ber uns Insekten
nur recht wenig in Erfahrung gebracht. ber unser Seelenleben wei er
fast nichts, und auf unser Herz und seine ngste nimmt er nicht die
kleinste Rcksicht. Sie werden hren.

Denken Sie nicht gut vom Menschen? fragte Maja.

Doch, doch, antwortete der Weberknecht und schaute schrg vor sich
nieder, aber mit sieben Beinen wird man bitter.

Ach so, sagte Maja.

Eines Abends, fuhr Hannibal fort, war ich wie gewhnlich in den
Fensterwinkeln auf der Jagd, und der Mensch sa vor seinen beiden
Flaschen und versuchte etwas zustande zu bringen. Ich rgerte mich schon
darber, da eine groe Anzahl der kleinen Fliegen und Mcken, von deren
Fang ich zu meinem Lebensunterhalt abhngig bin, sich auf die knstliche
Sonne des Menschen gesetzt hatte und hineinglotzte, ungebildet, wie
solche Tiere nun einmal sind.

Na, meinte Maja, ansehen wrde ich mir so was schlielich auch mal.

Ansehen, meinetwegen. Aber ansehen ist etwas ganz anderes wie glotzen.
Schauen Sie sich doch einmal die Torheiten an, die dies Gesindel bei
einer Lampe treibt. Da sie zwanzigmal mit dem Kopf dagegenrennen, ist
noch eine Kleinigkeit, manche tun es so lange, bis sie sich ihre Flgel
verbrannt haben. Dabei glotzen sie ununterbrochen das Licht an.

Die armen Tiere, meinte Maja, offenbar knnen sie sich nicht mehr
zurechtfinden.

Dann bleiben sie besser in den Fensternischen oder unter den Blttern
sitzen, sagte Hannibal, dort sind sie vor der Lampe sicher und dort
kann ich sie fangen. In jener verhngnisvollen Nacht nun sah ich von der
Fensternische aus vereinzelte Mcken neben der Lampe in den letzten
Zgen liegen. Ich beobachtete, da dem Menschen scheinbar nichts daran
gelegen war, und beschlo, sie mir zu holen. Ist etwas in der Welt
begreiflicher?

Nein, sagte Maja.

Und doch, es wurde mein Unglck. Leise und vorsichtig kroch ich am
Tischbein empor, bis ich ber den Rand schauen konnte. Der Mensch
erschien mir frchterlich gro, und ich betrachtete, was er tat. Langsam
setzte ich ein Bein vor das andere und nherte mich der Lampe. Solange
ich Deckung hinter der Flasche hatte, ging alles gut, aber kaum trat ich
hinter dem Glas hervor, als der Mensch auch schon aufblickte und nach
mir griff. Er nahm eins meiner Beine zwischen seine Finger, hob mich
daran empor bis dicht vor seine groen Augen und sagte: Ei, sieh da!
Und dabei grinste dieser Grobian ber das ganze Gesicht, als ob es sich
um ein Vergngen handelte.

Hannibal seufzte und die kleine Maja war ganz still. Endlich fragte sie
mit heiem Kopf.

Hat der Mensch so groe Augen?

Denken Sie jetzt geflligst an mich und an meine Lage, rief Hannibal
erregt. Versuchen Sie, sich meinen Gemtszustand vorzustellen. Wer
hngt gerne an einem Bein vor Augen, die etwa zwanzigmal so gro sind,
wie sein eigener Krper? Jeder der Zhne, welcher aus dem Mund des
Menschen wei hervorblitzte, war doppelt so gro wie ich. Nun, was
denken Sie?

Schrecklich, sagte Maja, also entsetzlich!

Da ri gottlob mein Bein. Es ist nicht abzusehen, was alles geschehen
wre, wenn es gehalten htte. Ich fiel und lief, so rasch mich meine
brigen Beine trugen, und versteckte mich hinter der Flasche, in deren
Schutz ich die furchtbarsten Drohungen gegen den Menschen ausstie.
Deshalb verfolgte er mich weiter nicht. Ich sah, wie er mein Bein auf
das weie Papier legte und zusah, wie es fortlaufen wollte, was es aber
ohne mich nicht kann.

Bewegte es sich noch? fragte Maja erschrocken.

Ja, erklrte ihr Hannibal, das tun unsere Beine immer, nachdem sie
ausgerissen worden sind. Mein Bein lief, aber weil ich nicht dabei war,
wute es nicht wohin. So zappelte es nur planlos auf demselben Fleck
herum, und der Mensch sah zu, fate seine Nase an und lchelte dabei,
herzlos wie er ist, ber das Pflichtbewutsein meines Beins.

Das ist unmglich, sagte die kleine Biene ganz eingeschchtert, ein
abbes Bein kann nicht krabbeln.

Was ist ein abbes Bein? fragte Hannibal.

Maja sah ihn an. Das ist ein Bein, das ab ist, erklrte sie, bei uns
zu Haus sagte man so.

Ihre Ausdrcke aus der Kinderstube gewhnen Sie sich im groen Leben
und vor gebildeten Leuten besser ab, forderte Hannibal mit Strenge.
Man sagt ein ausgerissenes Bein. Jedenfalls ist es wahr, da unsere
Beine noch lange zappeln, nachdem sie ausgerissen sind.

Nein, sagte Maja, das glaub ich nicht ohne Beweis.

Meinen Sie, ich risse mir Ihretwegen ein Bein aus? fragte Hannibal
bse. Ich merke schon, da man mit Ihnen nicht verkehren kann. So etwas
hat mir noch niemand zugemutet, hren Sie.

Maja wurde ganz befangen, sie begriff nicht, weshalb der Weberknecht so
verdrielich wurde und wo ihre Schuld lag. Es ist gar nicht so leicht,
mit fremden Leuten zu verkehren, dachte sie, sie denken anders und
begreifen oft nicht, da man es nicht bse meint. Sie wurde traurig und
sah bekmmert auf die groe Spinne mit ihren langen Beinen und ihrem
grmlichen Gesichtsausdruck.

Eigentlich sollte man den Versuch machen, Sie zu fressen, sagte da
pltzlich der Weberknecht, der offenbar die Gutmtigkeit Majas fr
Schwche gehalten hatte. Aber da geschah es der kleinen Biene ganz
seltsam, ihre Trauer war pltzlich verflogen, und an Stelle von Schreck
oder Furcht stieg ein ruhiger Mut in ihrem Herzen empor. Sie richtete
sich ein wenig auf, und whrend sie ihr hohes helles Summen ausstie,
fast ohne zu wissen, da sie es tat, sagte sie mit glnzenden Augen und
hob ihre schnen durchsichtigen Flgel ein wenig:

Ich bin eine Biene, mein Herr.

Pardon, sagte Hannibal, drehte sich ohne Gru um und lief den Stamm so
rasch hinunter, wie man nur irgend mit sieben Beinen laufen kann.

Maja mute lachen, ob sie wollte oder nicht. Unten begann Hannibal laut
zu schelten.

Sie haben einen schlechten Charakter, rief er aufgeregt, Sie gehen
mit Ihrem Stachel gegen Leute vor, die durch harte Schicksalsschlge
daran behindert sind, sich in gewohnter Weise von der Stelle zu bewegen.
Aber Ihre Stunde wird schlagen, und sobald Sie in Bedrngnisse geraten,
werden Sie an mich denken und alles bereuen.

Er verschwand unter den Huflattichblttern am Boden. Die kleine Biene
hatte nicht mehr alles verstanden, ihr war wohl zumut, zumal der Wind
fast ganz nachgelassen hatte und der Tag schn zu werden versprach. Hoch
am Himmel zogen weie Wolken im tiefen Blau, sie sahen still und
glcklich aus, wie gute Gedanken Gottes. Und hei und unwiderstehlich
berfiel die kleine Biene die Sehnsucht nach dem satten Schattengrund
der Waldwiesen und nach den besonnten Hngen jenseits des groen Sees,
dort mute lngst ein frohes Leben begonnen haben. Sie sah die schlanken
Grser schaukeln, und am Waldrand wuchsen in den schmalen Wassergrben
hohe gelbe Schwertlilien. Von ihren Kelchen sah man hinber in die
geheimnisvolle Nacht des Tannenwaldes, aus dem es khl und traurig
wehte. Sie wute, in seiner finstern Stille, die den Sonnenschein in ein
rtliches Schlummerlicht verwandelte, lag das Heimatland der Mrchen.

Da flog sie schon durch die Luft. Es war ihr gar nicht recht zum
Bewutsein gekommen, da sie aufgeflogen war. Die Waldwiesen und ihre
Blumenhnge hatten sie gerufen. O du lieber Gott, dachte sie, wie
herrlich ist es, zu leben.




Zehntes Kapitel

+Die Wunder der Nacht+


So verlebte die kleine Maja unter den Insekten die Tage und Wochen ihres
jungen Lebens. Wohl vermite sie bei ihrem Umhertreiben, bei allen
Freuden und Gefahren, in der schnen sommerlichen Welt oft die Gefhrten
ihrer ersten Kindheit, und zuweilen berfiel sie ein schmerzvolles
Heimweh nach dem verlassenen Knigreich ihres Volkes. Auch kannte sie
Stunden, in denen sie sich nach einer geordneten Ttigkeit sehnte, nach
ntzlicher Beschftigung und nach Gesellschaft unter ihresgleichen. Aber
sie hatte im Grunde eine ruhlose Natur, die kleine Maja, und sie wrde
sich wohl kaum schon dauernd in der Gemeinschaft der Bienen wohlgefhlt
haben. Bei allen Tieren, wie auch unter den Menschen, kommt es vor, da
einzelne Charaktere sich nicht in die Gewohnheiten aller schicken
knnen, und man mu vorsichtig sein und ernstlich prfen, bevor man
solch ein Wesen verurteilt. Denn es ist keineswegs immer nur Trgheit
oder Eigensinn, sondern hufig verbirgt sich hinter solchem Drang eine
tiefe Sehnsucht nach Hherem oder Besserem, als der Alltag zu bieten
vermag, und aus jungen Durchgngern sind oft erfahrene und kluge Mnner
geworden oder verstndige und gtige Frauen. Und die kleine Maja hatte
im Grunde ein reines und empfngliches Herz, und ihre Stellung zur
schnen weiten Welt, in der sie zum Leben erwacht war, war getragen von
aufrichtiger Wibegier und groer Freude an den Herrlichkeiten der
Schpfung.

Aber selbst im Glck schner Erlebnisse ist das Alleinsein schwer, und
je erfahrener die kleine Maja wurde, um so hufiger sehnte sie sich nach
Gemeinschaft und Liebe. Sie war nun keine ganz junge Biene mehr, sondern
ein prchtiges, starkes Bienentier, begabt mit blanken, gesunden
Flgeln, einem spitzen und gefhrlichen Stachel und einem ausgebildeten
Sinn fr die Gefahren und Freuden ihres Lebens. Sie hatte Erfahrungen
gemacht und Kenntnisse gesammelt und wnschte sich nun oft, sie auf
rechte Art verwenden zu knnen. Vielleicht wre sie eines Tages in den
Stock zurckgekehrt, htte sich der Knigin zu Fen geworfen und ihre
Verzeihung erfleht, um wieder in Ehren aufgenommen zu werden. Aber ein
brennendes Verlangen hielt sie davon zurck: sie wnschte sich, den
Menschen kennenzulernen. Sie hatte so viel Widersprechendes ber die
Menschen gehrt, da sie eher verwirrter als klger geworden war, und
doch ahnte sie, da es in der ganzen Schpfung nichts Mchtigeres,
Klgeres und Erhabeneres als den Menschen gbe.

Aus hoher Luft, aus weiter Entfernung hatte sie auf ihren Irrfahrten
wohl zuweilen Menschen gesehen, schwarze, weie und rote, auch solche,
die vielfarbig und bunt bekleidet waren, kleine und groe. Aber sie
hatte sich niemals in die Nhe getraut. Einmal sah sie es rot am Bach
schimmern, und da sie den Schein der Farbe fr ein Blumenbeet hielt, war
sie hinzugeflogen. Da fand sie einen Menschen mit goldenen Haaren und
rosigem Angesicht. Er schlief in einem roten Kleid in den Blumen am Bach
und sah trotz seiner furchtbaren Gre so gut und lieblich aus, da ihr
vor Entzcken Trnen in die Augen traten. Sie hatte alles um sich her
vergessen und nur immer den schlummernden Menschen betrachten mssen.
Was sie jemals an Bsem darber gehrt hatte, erschien ihr unmglich, es
war ihr, als mte alles Schlechte Lge gewesen sein, was man ihr jemals
ber solch liebliche Wesen berichtet hatte, wie dort eines im Schatten
der flsternden Birken schlief.

Spter kam eine Mcke zu ihr und grte.

Mein Gott, rief Maja, ganz hei vor Erregung und Freude, sehen Sie
dort den Menschen, wie schn, wie gut. Begeistert es Sie nicht?

Die Mcke sah erst Maja sehr erstaunt an und drehte sich dann langsam
nach dem Gegenstand ihrer Bewunderung um:

Ja, sagte sie, er ist gut, gewi, ich habe ihn eben angebohrt.
Schauen Sie, mein Leib schimmert rot von seinem Blut.

Maja mute ihrem Herzen mit der Hand zur Hilfe kommen, so sehr erschrak
sie ber die Khnheit der Mcke.

Wird er sterben? rief sie. Wo haben Sie ihn verletzt? Wie knnen Sie
nur den erforderlichen Mut und zugleich eine so unwrdige Gesinnung
aufbringen? Sie sind ja ein Raubtier!

Die Mcke lachte und antwortete mit ihrem hohen hellen Stimmchen
sichtlich amsiert:

Dies ist doch nur ein ganz kleiner Mensch. Diese Gre wird Mdchen
genannt, sobald die Beine bis zur Hlfte von einem abstehenden farbigen
Panzer bedeckt sind. Ich kann natrlich hindurchstechen, aber in der
Regel erreicht man die Haut nicht. -- Sie haben ja eine ganz fabelhafte
Unkenntnis, glauben Sie denn, die Menschen seien gut? Ich habe niemals
einen gefunden, der mir freiwillig auch nur das kleinste Trpfchen Blut
gegnnt htte.

Vom Menschen wei ich allerdings noch nicht sehr viel, sagte Maja
kleinlaut.

Aber Sie geben sich doch von allen Insekten am meisten mit den Menschen
ab, Sie lassen sich am weitesten mit ihnen ein, das ist doch bekannt.

Ich habe das Knigreich verlassen, gestand Maja schchtern. Es gefiel
mir nicht, ich wollte die Welt kennenlernen.

I, da sieh einer an, sagte die Mcke und trat einen Schritt nher.
Wie bekommt Ihnen denn Ihr Umhertreiben? Ich mu sagen, da es mir
gefllt, Sie so unabhngig zu sehen. Ich fr mein Teil wrde mich
niemals entschlieen, den Menschen zu dienen.

Sie dienen auch uns, sagte Maja, die es nicht ertragen konnte, da man
ihr Volk herabsetzte.

Mag sein, antwortete die Mcke, zu welchem Volk gehren Sie?

Ich stamme vom Volk der Bienen im Schlopark. Die regierende Knigin
ist Helene die Achte.

So, so, machte die Mcke und verbeugte sich, das ist eine
beneidenswerte Abstammung. Alle Achtung. Sie hatten krzlich Revolution,
nicht wahr? Ich hrte das durch die Kundschafter des Schwarms, der
ausgebrochen war. Habe ich recht?

Ja, sagte Maja stolz. Es erfllte sie mit Genugtuung und Freude, da
die Ihren so hohes Ansehen genossen und weit bekannt waren. Tief im
Herzen wachte wieder das Heimweh nach ihrem Volke auf, sie wnschte
sich, etwas Groes und Gutes fr ihre Knigin und zum Wohl ihres Staates
tun zu knnen. Darber verga sie nach dem Menschen zu fragen.
Vielleicht fragte sie auch deshalb nicht mehr, weil sie von der Mcke
nichts Gutes zu hren hoffte. Sie empfand die Kleine als frech und
naseweis, und solche Leute wissen gewhnlich ber andere nur Schlechtes
zu sagen.

Die Mcke war damals auch bald weitergeflogen.

Ich nehme noch einen Schluck, hatte sie gerufen. Spter werde ich mit
den Gefhrten in der Abendsonne fliegen, damit wir morgen gutes Wetter
bekommen.

Maja hatte sich davongemacht, weil es ihr unmglich war, mit anzusehen,
wie die Mcke dem schlafenden Kind Bses zufgte. Sie wunderte sich, da
die Mcke nicht daran zugrunde ging. Kassandra hatte ihr gesagt. Wenn
du einen Menschen stichst, mut du sterben.

Maja erinnerte sich dieses Vorfalls noch sehr genau, aber ihr Verlangen
danach, vom Menschen soviel als mglich kennenzulernen, war keinesfalls
befriedigt, sie beschlo, khner zu werden und keine Anstrengungen zu
scheuen, um zu ihrem Ziel zu gelangen.


Diese Wnsche Majas sollten sich auf wunderbare Art erfllen und viel
schner, als sie es erwartet hatte. Die kleine Biene war an einem warmen
Sommerabend frher als gewhnlich zur Ruhe gegangen, und pltzlich
erwachte sie mitten in der Nacht, das war ihr noch niemals geschehen.
Ihr Erstaunen war unbeschreiblich, als sie die Augen ffnete und ihren
kleinen Schlafraum ber und ber in ein stilles blaues Licht getaucht
sah. Es sank vom Eingang nieder, dessen ffnung wie unter einem
silberblauen Vorhang strahlte. Sie wagte sich anfangs kaum zu rhren,
aber sie frchtete sich nicht, denn mit diesem Schein kam ein seltsam
schner Friede zu ihr hineingezogen. Und es klang etwas drauen in der
Luft, was sie so fein und so voller Harmonie noch niemals vernommen
hatte. Endlich trat sie schchtern und ganz benommen vom Glanz dieser
ungewhnlichen Stunde an den Ausgang ihrer Baumhhle und sah hinaus. Ihr
war, als sei die ganze Welt durch ein Wunder verzaubert. berall
glitzerte und funkelte es von reinstem Silber, tausend helle Perlen
leuchteten matt und selig im Gras, das in der Ferne wie unter feinen
Schleiern lag, die Stmme der Birken und die schlafenden Bltter waren
mit Silber bermalt. Und alles umher, und in der stillen, seligen Weite,
war in ein sanftes blaues Licht gehllt.

Das ist die Nacht, das kann nur die Nacht sein, flsterte die kleine
Maja und faltete die Hnde.

Am hohen Himmel, ein wenig verhllt durch die Bltter eines Buchenastes,
stand eine volle, klare Silberscheibe, von der das Licht niedersank, das
die ganze Welt verschnte. Erst nun erkannte Maja, da um den Mond her
eine unzhlige Menge heller harter Lichtlein am Himmel brannten, schner
und stiller als alles, was sie jemals an Glanz gesehen hatte. Sie wute
nicht, was sie tun sollte vor Glck, da sie die Nacht, den Mond und die
Sterne und ihre lieblichen Wunder erlebte. Sie hatte von alledem nur
gehrt und niemals recht daran geglaubt.

Da vernahm sie wieder in ihrer Nhe ganz laut und weithin schallend den
seltsamen Nachtgesang, der sie geweckt haben mute. Es war ein
schwingendes Zirpen in einem hellen Silberton, fast htte man glauben
knnen, da das Licht vom Mond im Niederrieseln dies Klingen mit sich
brachte. Sie schaute sich um und suchte nach der Ursache, aber im
heimlichen Widerspiel von Licht und Schatten war es sehr schwer, etwas
deutlich zu erkennen; alles war geheimnisvoll verhllt und doch so wahr
und heldenhaft schn.

Es hielt die kleine Maja nicht lnger in ihrem Versteck, sie mute
hinaus in diese neue Pracht der Welt. Der liebe Gott wird mich behten,
dachte sie, ich habe ja nichts Bses vor.

Eben wollte sie davonfliegen, um in das blaue Licht ber der Wiese zu
kommen, auf die der volle Mond schien, als sie dicht in ihrer Nhe auf
einem Buchenblatt ein kleines geflgeltes Tier ankommen sah, das sie
noch niemals gesehen hatte. Und unmittelbar nachdem es angelangt war,
richtete es sich auf gegen den Mond, hob den einen schmalen Flgel ein
wenig und zog dann mit raschen Strichen sein Beinchen am Rand des
Flgels auf und nieder. Es sah aus, als geigte es auf einer versteckten
Geige, und richtig entstand jener zirpende Silberton, der die ganze
Mondnacht fllte.

Entzckend, flsterte Maja, nein, so was ist einfach himmlisch.

Sie flog rasch hinber. Die Sommernacht war lau und milde, so da die
kleine Biene nicht sprte, da es khler als am Tage war. Als sie auf
dem Blatt bei der Fremden anlangte, brach diese jhlings ihr Spiel ab,
es schien Maja, als sei es noch nie so still gewesen wie nun. Es war
gradezu unheimlich. Durch die dunklen Bltter rieselte das weie, khle
Licht.

Gute Nacht, sagte die kleine Maja sehr hflich, denn sie dachte, man
mte ebenso in der Nacht gren, wie man es am Tage tut, und sie fgte
rasch hinzu. Entschuldigen Sie, bitte, da ich stre, aber Ihr Spiel
hat etwas so Anziehendes, wenn man es hrt, mu man dem Klang
nachgehen.

Die Fremde schaute Maja mit groen Augen an:

Was sind denn Sie fr ein Krabbeltier? fragte sie endlich. So was hab
ich noch nie gesehen.

Ich bin durchaus kein Krabbeltier, sagte die Biene ernst, ich bin
Maja vom Volk der Bienen.

Ach, vom Volk der Bienen, so, so ..., sagte die Fremde. Sie leben am
Tage, nicht wahr? Ich habe durch den Igel von Ihrem Geschlecht gehrt.
Er erzhlte mir, da er am Abend die Toten fre, die aus Ihrem Stock
geworfen werden.

Ja, sagte Maja mit leisem Bangen, das ist wahr, Kassandra hat mir
davon erzhlt, der Igel kommt in der Abenddmmerung, er schmatzt und
sucht die Toten. Die Wchter haben es erzhlt. Aber verkehren Sie denn
mit dem Igel? Der Igel ist doch ein gradezu frchterliches Untier.

Das finde ich nicht, sagte die Fremde. Wir Nachtgrillen stehen uns
eigentlich ganz gut mit ihm. Natrlich, er versucht es immer wieder, uns
zu greifen, aber es gelingt ihm nie. So necken wir ihn oft und treiben
unser Spiel mit ihm. Wir nennen ihn Onkel. Leben mu schlielich jeder,
nicht wahr? Und solange einer nicht von mir lebt, kann es mir ja
gleichgltig sein.

Maja schttelte das Kpfchen, sie dachte anders darber, sie aber wollte
die Fremde nicht durch Widerspruch verletzen. So fragte sie freundlich:

Sie sind also eine Grille?

Ja, eine Nachtgrille. Aber Sie drfen mich nicht lnger stren, ich mu
spielen. Es ist Vollmond, und die Nacht ist wundervoll.

Ach, machen Sie eine Ausnahme, bat Maja, erzhlen Sie mir von der
Nacht.

Die Sommernacht ist das Schnste in der Welt, antwortete die Grille,
sie fllt das Herz mit Seligkeit. Was Sie nicht aus meinem Spiel hren,
werde ich Ihnen auch nicht erklren knnen. Warum mu man immer alles
wissen? Wir armen Wesen wissen vom Dasein nur ein kleines Teil, aber
fhlen knnen wir die ganze Herrlichkeit der Welt.

Und sie begann ihr helles, jubelndes Silberspiel, es klang laut und
bermchtig, wenn man es so nah hrte, wie Maja sa. Und die kleine
Biene sa ganz still in der blauen Sommernacht und hrte zu und dachte
sehr tief ber das Leben nach.

Da wurde es neben ihr still. Es klirrte leise, und sie sah die Grille in
den Mondschein hinausfliegen.

Die Nacht macht so traurig, dachte die kleine Maja.

Sie wollte nun hinunter auf die Blumenwiese. Am Bachrand standen
Wasserlilien, sie spiegelten sich in der raschen Flut, die den
Mondschein mit sich trug. Es war herrlich anzuschauen. Das Wasser
flsterte und blinkte und die geneigten Lilien schienen zu schlafen. Sie
sind eingeschlafen vor lauter Glck, dachte die kleine Biene. Sie lie
sich auf einem weien Blumenblatt, mitten im Mondschein nieder und
konnte den Blick nicht von dem lebendigen Wasser des Baches wenden, das
in zitternden Funken aufblitzte und wieder erlosch. Drben am Ufer
schimmerten Birken, und es sah aus, als hingen die Sterne darin.

Wohin fliet nur all dies Wasser, dachte sie. Die Grille hat recht, wir
wissen so wenig von der Welt.

Da hrte sie dicht neben sich im Kelch einer Lilie ein feines singendes
Stimmchen, so rein und glockenhell, wie sie noch niemals einen irdischen
Klang vernommen hatte; ihr Herz begann laut zu klopfen, und ihr Atem
stockte.

O, was wird geschehen, dachte sie, was werde ich zu sehen bekommen.

Die Lilie schwankte leicht, dann sah sie, da eines der Bltter sich am
Rande ein wenig nach innen bog und sie erblickte eine ganz kleine,
schneeweie Menschenhand, die sich mit winzigen Fingerchen daran
festhielt. Dann tauchte ein blondes Kpfchen auf und ein lichtes, zartes
Krperchen in einem weien Kleid. Es war ein ganz kleiner Mensch, der
aus der Lilie emporkam.

Den Schreck und das Entzcken der kleinen Maja kann niemand schildern.
Sie sa wie erstarrt da und konnte ihre Augen nicht von dem Anblick
wenden, der sich ihr darbot.

Das winzige Menschenwesen erklomm den Rand der Blte, hob die rmchen
gegen das Mondlicht und sah mit einem seligen Lcheln in die helle Nacht
der Menschenerde. Dann kam ein leises Zittern in das durchscheinende
Krperchen, und pltzlich entfalteten sich von den Schultern herab zwei
helle Flgel, weier als das Mondlicht und so rein wie Schnee. Sie
berragten das blonde Haupt und sanken bis an die Fe nieder. Nie, nie
hat die kleine Maja in ihrem Leben wieder etwas so Liebliches gesehen.
Und whrend das lichte kleine Menschlein so dastand und seine Hnde
gegen den Himmel reckte, erhob es seine Stimme wieder, und Maja verstand
das Lied, das in die Nacht hinausklang:

  Meine Heimat ist das Licht.
  Heller Himmel meine Freude.
  Tod und Leben wechseln beide,
  aber meine Seele nicht.

  Meine Seele ist der Hauch,
  der aus aller Schnheit bricht,
  wie aus Gottes Angesicht,
  so aus seiner Schpfung auch.

Die kleine Maja berkam ein heftiges Schluchzen, sie konnte sich nicht
erklren, was sie so traurig machte und sie gleichzeitig so beglckte.

Da wandte sich das kleine Menschenwesen nach ihr um:

Wer weint denn da? fragte es mit seiner klaren Stimme.

Ach, das bin nur ich, stammelte Maja. Entschuldigen Sie, da ich
gestrt habe.

Warum weinst du denn?

Ich wei es nicht, sagte Maja, vielleicht nur, weil Sie so schn
sind. Wer sind Sie, ach sagen Sie es mir, wenn ich nicht zuviel
verlange. Sie sind sicher ein Engel.

O nein, sagte das kleine Wesen und blieb ganz ernst, ich bin nur ein
Blumenelf. Aber du kannst ruhig du zu mir sagen. Was machst denn du
kleine Biene in der Nacht drauen auf der Wiese?

Der Elf flog zu Maja hinber, setzte sich auf ein gebogenes Lilienblatt,
das ihn sanft schaukelte und betrachtete die kleine Biene ernst und
freundlich. Und whrend Maja ihm erzhlte, alles was sie wute und
wollte und was sie getan hatte, sahen immer die groen dunklen Augen aus
dem weien Elfengesicht sie an, unter dem goldenen Haar hervor, das im
Mond zuweilen wie Silber glnzte.

Der Blumenelf strich Maja ber das Kpfchen, als sie ihre Geschichte
erzhlt hatte und sah sie so innig und liebevoll an, da die kleine
Biene vor Glck die Blicke senken mute. Und dann erzhlte er ihr:

Wir Elfen leben sieben Nchte, aber wir mssen in der Blume bleiben,
in der wir geboren sind. Wenn wir die Blume verlassen, so mssen wir im
Morgenrot sterben.

Maja ri vor Angst und Schrecken die Augen weit auf.

O rasch, rasch, flieg in deine Blume zurck! rief sie.

Der Elf schttelte traurig den Kopf.

Nun ist es zu spt, sagte er, aber hre weiter. Die meisten Elfen
verlassen ihre Blumen, denn es verbindet sich ein groes Glck damit.
Wer seine Blume verlt und so einen frhen Tod erleidet, der hat zuvor
eine wunderbare Macht. Er kann dem ersten Wesen, das ihm begegnet,
seinen liebsten Wunsch erfllen. Wenn er ernstlich den Willen hat, die
Blume zu verlassen, um andere zu beglcken, so wachsen ihm zugleich
seine Flgel.

Ach, wie herrlich, rief Maja, da wrde ich auch die Blume verlassen.
Das mu wunderschn sein, den liebsten Wunsch eines anderen zu
erfllen. Die kleine Biene dachte gar nicht daran, da sie das erste
Wesen war, dem der Elf auf seinem Flug aus der Blume begegnet war.

Und dann, fragte sie, mut du dann sterben?

Der Elf nickte, aber diesmal gar nicht traurig.

Wir sehen noch das Morgenrot, sagte er, aber wenn der Tau fllt, dann
zieht es uns zu den feinen Schleiern hinber, die ber dem Gras der
Wiesen schweben. Hast du nicht oft gesehen, da diese Schleier ganz wei
leuchten, als wre Licht darin? Das sind die Elfen, ihre Flgel und ihre
Kleider. Und mit dem heraufsteigenden Licht verwandeln wir uns in
Tautropfen. Die Pflanzen trinken uns und nehmen uns in ihr Blhen und
Wachsen auf, bis wir nach Zeiten wieder als Elfen aus ihren
Blumenkelchen steigen.

So warst du frher schon einmal ein anderer Elf? fragte Maja in
atemloser Spannung.

Die ernsten Augen nickten ihr zu:

Ja, aber ich habe es vergessen. Wir vergessen alles in unserm
Blumenschlaf.

O, dein Los ist lieblich, rief die kleine Maja.

Es ist das Los aller Erdenwesen, sagte der Elf, wenn man es weit und
gro betrachtet. Auch wenn es nicht immer Blumen sind, in denen sie aus
ihrem Todesschlaf erwachen. Aber davon wollen wir heute nicht sprechen.

O, ich bin glcklich, rief Maja.

So hast du keinen Wunsch? fragte der Elf. Weit du denn nicht, da du
das erste Wesen bist, das mir begegnet und da ich deinen liebsten
Wunsch erfllen soll?

Ich? rief Maja, aber ich bin doch nur eine Biene. Nein, das ist
zuviel Freude fr mich, ich habe nicht verdient, da man so gut gegen
mich ist.

Niemand verdient das Gute und Schne, sagte der Elf, es kommt zu uns
wie der Sonnenschein.

Majas Herz klopfte strmisch. O, sie hatte seit lange einen heien
Wunsch, aber sie wagte es nicht, ihn vorzubringen. Aber der Elf schien
es zu ahnen, denn er lchelte so, da man ihm nichts verschweigen
konnte.

Nun? fragte er und strich sich das goldene Haar aus der reinen Stirn.

Ich mchte die Menschen kennenlernen, wie sie am schnsten sind, sagte
die kleine Biene hei und rasch und frchtete, sie wrde hren, da man
einen so groen Wunsch nicht erfllen knnte.

Aber der Elf erhob sich ernst und ruhig, und seine Augen bekamen einen
Glanz von Zuversicht, er nahm die zitternde Hand der kleinen Maja und
sagte:

Komm, wir fliegen zusammen, dein Wunsch soll in Erfllung gehen.




Elftes Kapitel

+Die Elfenfahrt+


So flogen der Blumenelf und die kleine Maja durch die Sommernacht dicht
ber den blhenden Blumen dahin. Als sie ber den Bach kamen, blinkte
das weie Spiegelbild des Elfen im Wasser auf, als zge ein Stern
hindurch.

Mit wieviel Beglcktheit vertraute die kleine Biene sich diesem holden
Wesen an! Sie htte gar zu gern eine Menge wichtiger Fragen gestellt,
aber sie wagte es nicht. Der Elf wrde es schon gut hinausfhren, das
fhlte sie zuversichtlich.

Als sie miteinander durch eine hohe Pappelallee flogen, surrte es ber
ihnen, und ein dunkler Schmetterling, gro und stark wie ein Vogel,
kreuzte ihren Weg. Der Blumenelf rief ihn an:

Warte einen Augenblick, ich bitte dich! rief er.

Maja war sehr erstaunt, wie bereitwillig der dunkle Falter dem Ruf
gehorchte. Sie lieen sich auf einem Ast der hohen Pappel nieder. Neben
ihnen flsterte das bewegliche Laub im Mond, und man sah weit in die
stille, beschienene Nachtlandschaft. Der Falter sa Maja grade gegenber
mitten im Mondlicht. Er hob seine ausgebreiteten Flgel langsam und
senkte sie wieder sanft, als wollte er jemandem Khlung zufcheln. Maja
sah, da quer ber die Flgel breite Streifen liefen von einem hellen,
herrlichen Blau. Sein schwarzer Kopf war wie mit dunklem Samt gedeckt,
und sein Gesicht, darin ein schwarzes Augenpaar glhte, sah aus, als
trge er eine seltsam geheimnisvolle Maske. Wie wunderbar waren die
Tiere der Nacht. Maja frstelte ein wenig, ihr war zumut, als trumte
sie den sonderbarsten Traum ihres Lebens.

Sie sind sehr schn, sagte sie zu dem Fremden, also wirklich ... Ihr
war ganz feierlich zu Sinn.

Wen hast du denn da bei dir? fragte der Nachtfalter den Elf.

Es ist eine Biene, antwortete der Elf. Ich bin ihr begegnet, als ich
den Blumenkelch verlie.

Der Falter schien zu wissen, was sich damit verband, denn er sah Maja
beinahe ein wenig neidisch an und nickte ihr ernst und gedankenvoll zu.

Sie Glckliche, sagte er dann leise.

Sind denn Sie vielleicht traurig? fragte Maja herzlich.

Der Falter schttelte den Kopf.

Nein, das nicht, sagte er freundlich und dankbar und sah Maja so lieb
an, da sie gern gleich Freundschaft mit ihm geschlossen htte. Aber
dazu war er zu gro.

Nun fragte der Blumenelf den Falter, ob die Fledermaus schon zur Ruhe
gegangen sei.

O ja, antwortete der Falter, schon lngst. Du meinst wohl wegen
deiner Begleiterin? fgte er hinzu.

Der Elf nickte, und Maja htte gern gewut, was eine Fledermaus ist,
aber der Elf schien es eilig zu haben. In holder Ruhlosigkeit warf er
sein schimmerndes Haar zurck. Eine Nacht ist so kurz, sagte er,
komm, Maja, wir mssen eilen.

Soll ich dich ein Stckchen tragen? fragte der Nachtfalter.

Der Elf dankte. Ein andermal! rief er.

So wird es nie mehr sein, dachte die kleine Biene, als sie weiterflogen,
denn im Morgenrot mu der Blumenelf sterben.

Der Nachtfalter blieb noch sitzen und sah den beiden nach, bis der
Schein des Elfenkleides immer kleiner und kleiner wurde und endlich ganz
in den Tiefen der blauen Ferne versank. Dann drehte er sich langsam auf
seinem Blatt etwas herum, wandte den Kopf und betrachtete seine groen
dunklen Flgel mit den breiten blauen Bndern darauf. Er wurde dabei
sehr nachdenklich.

Ich habe so oft gehrt, sann er, da ich grau und hlich bin und da
mein Kleid den prchtigen Gewndern der Tagesfalter nicht zu vergleichen
wre. Die kleine Biene hat an mir nur das gesehen, was schn ist. -- Und
dann dachte er darber nach, ob er nicht vielleicht doch traurig sei,
Maja hatte ihn danach gefragt. Nein, sagte er endlich, ich bin es
jetzt nicht mehr, so viel ist sicher. --

Indessen flogen Maja und der Blumenelf durch das dichte Gebsch eines
Gartens. Das war eine Pracht im gedmpften Mondglanz, wie kein irdischer
Mund sie nennen kann. Ein betrend ser Hauch von Taukhle und
schlummernden Blumen verzauberte alles zu unaussprechlichen Wohltaten
der Natur. Die lila Trauben der Akazien funkelten vor Frische, und der
Junirosenbusch sah wie ein kleiner blhender Himmel voller roter Lampen
aus. Bleich und traurig glommen die weien Sterne des Jasmin, sie
strmten einen Duft aus, als wollten sie noch in dieser Stunde alles
verschenken, was ihr eigen war. Maja wurde ganz verwirrt und prete die
Hand des Elfen, dessen Augen verklrt und selig schimmerten.

Wer htte das gedacht, sagte die kleine Maja, nein, wer htte das fr
mglich gehalten. Aber da erblickte sie etwas, das sie von Herzen
traurig stimmte.

O, rief sie, sieh, ein Stern ist gefallen! Nun irrt er umher und kann
seinen Platz am Himmel nicht wiederfinden.

Es ist ein Glhkferchen, sagte der Blumenelf ernst.

Da merkte Maja trotz ihres Erstaunens zum erstenmal, warum ihr der Elf
so liebevoll erschien. Er lachte niemals ber ihre Unkenntnis, sondern
er half ihren armen Gedanken, wenn sie sich nicht zurechtfinden konnten.

Es sind seltsame Tierchen, fuhr der Elf fort. Sie tragen ihr eigenes
Licht durch die laue Nacht umher, so beleben sie das Dunkel unter den
Kuppeln der Bsche, wohin der Mond nicht dringt und finden einander
leicht. Spter sollst du einen kennenlernen, wenn wir zu den Menschen
kommen.

Maja wollte wissen weshalb.

Gleich wirst du es sehen, sagte der Blumenelf.

Sie waren inzwischen an einer Laube angekommen, die ber und ber von
Jasmin und Gaisblatt bewachsen war. Sie lieen sich dicht am Boden
nieder, ganz in der Nhe der Laube, aus der ein leises Flstern klang.
Der Blumenelf winkte einem Glhkferchen. Sei so gut, bat er den
Kleinen, leuchte ein wenig, wir mssen hier durch die dunklen Bltter
hindurch, um in das Innere der Jasminlaube zu dringen.

Aber dein Schein ist ja viel heller als meiner, sagte der Glhkfer.

Das finde ich auch, meinte Maja, eigentlich nur um ihre Erregung zu
verbergen.

Ich mu mich in ein Blatt einhllen, erklrte der Elf, sonst sehen
die Menschen mich und sie wrden erschrecken. Wir Elfen erscheinen den
Menschen nur in ihren Trumen.

Das ist etwas anderes, sagte der Glhkfer. Mach gtigst Gebrauch von
mir. Ich werde tun, was ich kann. Wird das groe Tier, das du bei dir
hast, mir nichts zu leide tun?

Der Elf schttelte den Kopf, und der Glhkfer glaubte ihm gleich.

Nun nahm der Blumenelf ein Blatt und wickelte sich sorgfltig hinein,
so da sein weies Kleid nirgends durchschimmerte. Dann pflckte er eine
kleine blaue Glockenblume, die er im Gras fand, und setzte sie wie einen
Helm auf sein leuchtendes Haar. Nun war nur sein weies Gesicht zu
sehen, das so klein war, da sicher niemand es entdeckt htte. Er bat
den Glhkfer, sich auf seine Schulter zu setzen und sein Lmpchen an
der einen Seite mit dem Flgel ein wenig abzudmpfen, damit es die Augen
nicht blendete. Dann nahm er Majas Hand und sagte:

Nun komm. Am besten klettern wir hier empor.

Die kleine Maja dachte an das, was der Elf vorhin erzhlt hatte, und
fragte, whrend sie in den Ranken aufwrtsstiegen:

Trumen die Menschen, wenn sie schlafen?

Nicht nur dann, sagte der Elf, sondern sie trumen zuweilen auch,
wenn sie wachen. Dann sitzen sie da, etwas in sich zusammengesunken, ihr
Kopf neigt sich ein wenig, und ihre Augen suchen in der Ferne, als ob
sie bis in den Himmel schauen mchten. Immer sind ihre Trume schner
als das Leben, deshalb erscheinen wir ihnen darin.

Aber da legte der Elf rasch das winzige Fingerchen auf seine Lippen, bog
einen keinen blhenden Jasminzweig zur Seite und schob dann Maja ein
wenig vor.

Sieh nun hinab, sagte er leise, dort findest du, was du dir gewnscht
hast.

Da sah die kleine Biene im Mondschatten auf einer Bank zwei Menschen
sitzen. Es waren ein Mdchen und ein Jngling. Sie hatte ihren Kopf an
seine Schulter gelehnt, und sein Arm hielt sie umschlungen, als ob er
sie schtzen wollte. Sie saen ganz still da und schauten mit groen
Augen in die Nacht. Es war so ruhig, als wren sie beide eingeschlafen,
nur in der Ferne hrte man die Grillen und langsam, langsam wanderte das
Mondlicht in den Blttern.

Die kleine Maja sah voll Entzcken in das Gesicht des Mdchens. Obgleich
es bleich und traurig erschien, lag doch ein Schimmer von groem Glck
darber, der wie ein heimliches Leuchten war. ber den groen Augen
ruhte goldenes Haar, wie auch der Elf es hatte, und auf dem Haar lag der
Himmelsschein der Sommernacht. Von ihren roten Lippen, die ein klein
wenig geffnet waren, ging ein Hauch von Wehmut und Seligkeit, als ob
sie alles, was ihr eigen war, zum Glck des Mannes dahingeben wollte der
an ihrer Seite sa. Und nun wandte sie sich ihm zu und zog sein Haupt zu
sich nieder und sagte etwas, das ein Lcheln in sein Gesicht zauberte,
wie Maja nie geglaubt hatte, da ein Wesen der Erde lcheln knnte. In
seinen Augen strahlten ein Glck und eine Kraft, als ob die ganze, groe
Erde sein Eigentum wre und als wren Leid und Ungemach fr immer aus
der Welt verbannt.

Es verlangte Maja nicht danach zu wissen, was er dem Mdchen antwortete.
Ihr Herz zitterte, als sei die Seligkeit, die von den Menschen unter ihr
ausging, auch ihr Eigentum. Nun habe ich das Herrlichste gesehen,
flsterte sie bebend, was meine Augen jemals schauen werden. Ich wei
nun, da die Menschen am schnsten sind, wenn sie einander liebhaben.

Sie wute nicht, wie lange sie so still und in Schaun versunken hinter
den Blttern gesessen hatte. Als sie sich umwandte, war der Schein des
Glhkfers erloschen, und der Elf war fort.

Da erblickte sie durch den Ausgang der Laube fern ber der Landschaft
einen schmalen, roten Lichtstreif am Horizont.




Zwlftes Kapitel

+Der Dichter Alois Siebenpunkt+


Die Sonne war schon hoch ber die Kronen der Buchen emporgestiegen, als
Maja am anderen Morgen in ihrer Waldburg erwachte. Anfangs glaubte sie,
das ganze Erlebnis der letzten Nacht sei ein schner Traum gewesen, aber
dann entsann sie sich, da sie in der khlen Morgendmmerung in ihrer
Behausung angelangt war, und nun war es fast schon Mittag. Nein, es war
Wirklichkeit gewesen, sie hatte die Nacht mit dem Elfen verbracht und
die Menschen gesehen, die sich in der Jasminlaube im Mondschein
umschlungen gehalten hatten.

Drauen brannte die Sonne hei auf den Blttern, es zog ein warmer Wind,
und sie hrte die vielerlei Stimmen der Insekten. Ach, was wuten die
anderen, und was wute sie! Sie war so stolz auf ihr Erlebnis, da sie
gar nicht rasch genug hinauskommen konnte, sie meinte, alle mten es
ihr ansehen, was ihr geschehen war.

Aber drauen in der Sonne nahm alles den gewohnten Gang. Nichts war
verndert, und nichts erinnerte an die blaue Nacht. Die Insekten kamen,
grten und zogen, drben auf der Wiese war ber den hohen bunten
Sommerblumen, im Flimmern der heien Luft, ein groer Verkehr. Maja ward
pltzlich ganz traurig zumut. Sie fhlte, da es niemand in der Welt
gab, der an ihrem Glck oder an ihrer Betrbnis teilnahm. Sie konnte
sich nicht entschlieen, zu den anderen hinberzufliegen. Ich will in
den Wald, dachte sie, der Wald ist ernst und feierlich, er pat zu dem
Zustand, in welchem mein Herz sich befindet.

Wieviel Geheimnisvolles und wie viele Wunder das Waldesdunkel birgt,
ahnt wohl niemand, der rasch und gedankenlos auf den gebahnten Wegen
dahingeht. Dazu mu man die Zweige der Bsche auseinandergebogen haben,
oder seine Blicke zwischen den Brombeerranken hindurch in die hohen
Grser und ber das dichte Moos schweifen lassen. Unter schattigen
Blttern der Pflanzen, in Erdlchern und Baumhhlen, zwischen den
morschen Rinden verwitterter Holzstmpfe und im krausen Schlingwerk der
Wurzeln, die sich wie Schlangenleiber ber den Erdboden dahinwinden, ist
Tag und Nacht ein reges und vielgestaltiges Leben, voller Freuden und
Gefahren, voller Kampf und Leid und Vergngen.

Die kleine Maja ahnte von alledem nur wenig, als sie zwischen den
braunen Stmmen und dem grnen Bltterdach dahinflog. Sie erkannte unter
sich im Gras eine schmale Spur, die als ein deutlicher Weg durch
Dickicht und Lichtungen fhrte. Zuweilen schien es ihr, als verschwnde
die Sonne hinter Wolken, so tief wurden die Schatten unter den hohen
Kronen und im dichten Buschwerk; dann wieder flog sie in lauter
goldgrnem Glnzen dahin, unter sich die breitbltterigen kleinen Wlder
der Waldfarren und blhende Brombeerranken.

Endlich ffnete der Wald seine berdachten Sulentore, und vor Majas
Blicken lag ein weites Kornfeld in der goldenen Sonne. In den hren
leuchteten Kornblumen und Mohn. Die kleine Biene lie sich in den
Zweigen einer Birke nieder, die am Rand des Feldes stand, und
betrachtete entzckt das goldene Meer, das sich im Frieden des stillen
Tags vor ihr ausbreitete. Es erschien ihr unabsehbar weit, und es gingen
sanfte Wogen darber hin; das tat der schchterne Sommerwind, der so
liebreich wehte, um nirgends die Ruhe der schnen Welt zu stren.

Ein paar kleine braune Schmetterlinge spielten unter der Birke ber dem
Korn Von Mohn zu Mohn. Das ist unter jungen Schmetterlingen ein sehr
beliebtes Gesellschaftsspiel. Jeder Schmetterling setzt sich auf eine
Blume, und es mu ein Spieler mehr da sein, als Blumen in der Nhe
stehen. Dieser eine sitzt in der Mitte des Kreises und ruft. Wenn sein
Ruf erklingt, mssen alle auffliegen und die Blumen wechseln. Wer zu
spt kommt und keine Blume mehr findet, wird in die Mitte geschickt und
mu abrufen. Das war sehr unterhaltend.

Maja sah eine Weile zu, es machte ihr viel Vergngen. Das knnte man
auch die kleinen Bienen im Stock lehren, dachte sie, da nennen wir es
dann Von Zelle zu Zelle. Aber Kassandra wird wahrscheinlich zu streng
sein.

Die kleine Maja wurde pltzlich traurig gestimmt, das kam sicher durch
ihre Erinnerung an die Heimat. Als sie darber nachdenken wollte, sagte
neben ihr jemand:

Guten Morgen. Sie sind eine Bestie, wie mir scheint.

Die kleine Maja erschrak sehr und drehte sich rasch um.

Nein, sagte sie, bestimmt nicht!

Neben ihr sa eine kleine braune Halbkugel mit sieben schwarzen Punkten
darauf. Unter dieser rotbraunen Kuppel, die brigens prchtig glnzte,
sah man ein winziges schwarzes Kpfchen, in dem zwei helle uglein
funkelten, und nun erkannte Maja auch die dnnen Beinchen, die, fein wie
Fden, unter der punktierten Kuppel hervorschauten und sie so gut trugen
als sie eben konnten. Dieser kleine Dicke war es, der Maja angerufen
hatte. Trotz seiner seltsamen Gestalt gefiel er der Biene ausgezeichnet,
er hatte etwas gradezu Anmutiges.

Wer sind Sie nur? fragte sie, ich selbst bin Maja, vom Volk der
Bienen.

Wollen Sie mich beleidigen? fragte der Kleine. Dazu liegt kein Grund
vor, das merken Sie sich.

Aber wie sollte ich dazu kommen? fragte die kleine Maja ganz
erschrocken, ich kenne Sie in der Tat nicht.

Das kann jeder sagen, meinte der Dicke. Nun, ich will Ihrem
Gedchtnis nachhelfen. Zhlen Sie. Und der Kleine begann sich langsam
umzudrehn.

Soll ich Ihre Punkte zhlen?

Ja, bitte schn, sagte der Kfer.

Es sind sieben Punkte, sagte Maja.

Nun? fragte der Kfer, also? Sie wissen es immer noch nicht? So will
ich es Ihnen sagen. Ich heie genau so, wie sich nachzhlen lt. Ich
gehre zur Familie der Siebenpunkte, heie Alois und bin meines Zeichens
Dichter. Die Menschen nennen mich auch Marienkfer. Das ist ihre Sache.
Aber das wissen Sie ja jedenfalls.

Maja wagte nicht nein zu sagen, denn sie frchtete Alois zu krnken.

O, sagte Alois, ich lebe vom Sonnenschein, vom Frieden des Tages und
von der Liebe der Menschen.

Aber essen Sie denn nichts? fragte Maja berrascht.

Doch, Blattluse. Sie nicht?

Nein, sagte Maja, das ist doch ...

Was ist es denn? Wie?

Es ist nicht blich, sagte Maja schchtern.

Natrlich! rief Alois und versuchte die eine Schulter hochzuziehen,
was ihm aber wegen seiner festen Kuppel nicht gelang, Sie tun als
Brgerliche selbstverstndlich nur das, was blich ist. Damit kmen wir
Dichter nicht weit. Haben Sie Zeit?

Doch, sagte Maja, gewi.

Dann werde ich Ihnen eine Dichtung vortragen. Sitzen Sie still und
schlieen Sie die Augen, damit die Umgebung Sie nicht strt. Das Gedicht
heit Der Menschenfinger. Es ist ein persnliches Erlebnis und von
mir. Hren Sie?

Ja, sagte Maja, jedes Wort.

Also:

  +Der Menschenfinger+

  Einmal hast du mich entdeckt,
  als ich Glck im Leben hatte.
  Du bist rund und langgestreckt.
  Oben hast du eine glatte,
  zugespitzte Panzerplatte,
  welche sich bewegen lt,
  aber unten sitzt du fest!

Nun? fragte Alois nach einem kleinen Schweigen. Er hatte Trnen in den
Augen und seine Stimme zitterte.

Der Menschenfinger hat mich sehr ergriffen, meinte Maja, die etwas
verlegen geworden war. Eigentlich kannte sie schnere Lieder.

Wie finden Sie die Form? fragte Alois und lchelte wehmtig. Er war
sichtlich durch die Wirkung berwltigt, die er hervorgebracht hatte.

Rund und langgestreckt, antwortete Maja. Sie haben es ja selbst
gedichtet.

Ich meine die knstlerische Form, ich meine die Form meiner Dichtung.

Ah, sagte Maja, ach so. Ja, die finde ich gut.

Nicht wahr? rief Alois. Sie wollten sagen, da dies Lied dem besten
eingereiht werden kann, was Sie kennen, da man weit zurckgreifen mu,
ehe man etwas Verwandtes findet. Die Kunst mu zunchst Neuigkeiten
enthalten, das ist es, was die meisten Dichter bersehen. Und dann
Gre, nicht wahr?

Doch, sagte Maja, ich glaube ...

Ihr zuversichtlicher Glaube an meine Bedeutung, den Sie ausgesprochen
haben, sagte Alois, beschmt mich gradezu. Haben Sie Dank. Ich mu nun
weiter, denn die Einsamkeit ist die Zierde des Knstlers. Leben Sie
wohl.

Adieu, sagte Maja, die gar nicht recht wute, was der Kleine
eigentlich gewollt hatte. Nun, er selbst wird es schon wissen, dachte
sie. Gro ist er ja eigentlich nicht, aber vielleicht wchst er noch.
Sie sah ihm nach, wie er eifrig den Zweig hinaufkrabbelte. Man konnte
seine winzigen Beinchen kaum unterscheiden, so da es aussah, als schbe
er sich auf kleinen Rollen davon.

Dann sah Maja wieder auf das goldene Kornfeld nieder, ber dem die
Schmetterlinge spielten. Das gefiel ihr weit besser als das Werk des
Alois Siebenpunkt.




Dreizehntes Kapitel

+Die Ruberburg+


Ach, wie froh hatte dieser Tag begonnen, und wie voller Angst und
Schrecken sollte er enden. Maja hatte zuvor noch eine sehr merkwrdige
Bekanntschaft gemacht, es war am Nachmittag gewesen, in der Nhe einer
groen alten Wassertonne. Sie sa in den duftenden Holunderblten, die
sich in der stillen, schwarzen Wasserflche der Tonne spiegelten. ber
ihr sang ein Rotkehlchen so lieblich und froh, da die kleine Maja es
gradezu trostlos fand, da man sich mit den Vgeln nicht befreunden
konnte. Sie waren zu gro und fraen einen auf, das war die Sache. Sie
hatte sich in der weien Bltendolde des Holunder versteckt und lauschte
und blinzelte dabei mit den Augen, so da der Sonnenschein ihr spitze
Pfeile schickte, als neben ihr jemand seufzte. Als sie sich umdrehte,
sah sie das sonderbarste Tier, das ihr jemals begegnet war. Auf den
ersten Blick glaubte sie, da es mindestens hundert Beine an jeder Seite
hatte. Es war wohl dreimal so lang wie sie selbst, aber schmal und
niedrig und ohne Flgel.

Himmel noch mal! rief Maja ganz erschrocken, Sie mssen aber laufen
knnen.

Der Fremde sah sie nachdenklich an.

Ich zweifle daran, meinte er, es knnte besser sein. Ich habe zu
viele Beine. Wissen Sie, ehe man sie alle bewegt hat, vergeht zu viel
Zeit. Es gab Zeiten, in denen ich das nicht gewut habe, da ist mir oft
der Wunsch gekommen, ich htte ein paar Beine mehr. Aber wie Gott will.
Wer sind denn Sie?

Maja stellte sich vor.

Der andere nickte und bewegte einige Beine.

Ich bin Hieronymus, sagte er, von der Familie der Tausendfler. Wir
sind ein altes Geschlecht und erregen berall Bewunderung. Es gibt keine
Tiere, die annhernd unsere Beinzahl aufzuweisen haben. Acht ist das
Hchste bei den andern, soviel ich wei.

Sie sind fabelhaft interessant, sagte die kleine Maja, und sehr
eigenartig in der Farbe. Haben Sie Familie?

Aber nein! Wieso denn? fragte der Tausendfler. Wohin sollte das
fhren? Wir kriechen aus dem Ei und damit basta. Wenn nicht einmal wir
auf eigenen Fen stehen knnten, wer sollte es dann knnen?

Das ist ja richtig, meinte Maja nachdenklich, aber haben Sie gar
keinen Anschlu?

Nein, meine Gute. Ich ernhre mich und zweifle.

Ach, woran zweifeln Sie denn?

Es ist mir angeboren, entgegnete der Fremde, ich mu immer zweifeln.

Maja sah ihn mit groen, erstaunten Augen an. Sie verstand nicht, wie er
das meinte, und wollte doch nicht allzu neugierig in seine
Angelegenheiten eindringen.

Ich zweifle daran, sagte nach einer Weile Hieronymus, da Sie sich
hier einen gnstigen Ort zum Aufenthalt ausgesucht haben. Wissen Sie
nicht, was drben in der groen Weide liegt?

Nein.

Sehen Sie, ich habe gleich bezweifelt, da Sie es wissen. Dort liegt
die Hornissenstadt.

Maja wre fast von der Bltendolde gefallen, so furchtbar erschrak sie.
Sie wurde totenbla, und zitternd fragte sie, wo die Stadt lge.

Sehen Sie dort den alten Starenkasten im Gebsch am Stamm der Weide?
Er ist so ungeschickt angebracht, da ich gleich daran gezweifelt habe,
da er jemals von Staren bezogen wird. Wenn so ein Kasten nicht gegen
Sonnenaufgang geffnet ist, besinnt sich jeder anstndige Vogel, ehe
er einzieht. Die Hornissen haben nun darin ihre Stadt angelegt und
befestigt. Es ist die grte Hornissenburg im Land. Das sollten Sie
eigentlich wissen, denn soviel ich beobachtet habe, stellen diese Ruber
euch Bienen nach.

Maja hrte kaum noch zu. Sie unterschied deutlich die braunen Mauern der
Burg im Grn, und ihr Atem stockte.

Ich mu fort, rief sie, so rasch als mglich.

Aber da klang hinter ihr ein lautes, bses Lachen, und gleich darauf
fhlte die kleine Maja sich so energisch am Kragen gepackt, da sie
meinte, ihr Genick sei gebrochen. Nie in ihrem Leben hat sie dies Lachen
vergessen knnen. Es klang wie ein Hohngelchter aus der Finsternis, und
ein grauenerregendes Klirren von einem Panzer mischte sich hinein.

Hieronymus lie sich mit allen seinen Beinen zugleich los und purzelte
durch die Zweige in die Wassertonne.

Ich zweifle daran, da es gut geht, rief er, aber das hrte die arme
kleine Biene nicht mehr.

Sie konnte sich anfangs kaum umkehren, so fest wurde sie gehalten. Sie
sah einen goldgepanzerten Arm und dann pltzlich ber sich einen
ungeheuren Kopf mit frchterlichen Zangen. Zuerst glaubte sie, es sei
eine riesengroe Wespe, aber dann erkannte sie, da sie sich in den
Fngen einer Hornisse befand. Das schwarz und gelb getigerte Ungeheuer
war wohl viermal so gro wie sie selbst.

Endlich lste sich ihre Stimme, und sie schrie so laut um Hilfe, als sie
konnte.

La doch, Kerlchen, meinte die Hornisse mit einer ganz unausstehlichen
Freundlichkeit und lchelte Maja bse an. Es dauert nur so lange, bis
es vorber ist.

Lassen Sie mich los, schrie Maja, oder ich steche Sie ins Herz.

Gleich ins Herz? lachte der Ruber, das ist ja sehr mutig. Aber es
hat noch Zeit, meine Kleine.

Maja geriet in furchtbare Wut. Mit Aufwendung aller ihrer Krfte drehte
sie sich herum, stie ihren hellen, hohen Kampfruf aus und richtete
ihren Stachel der Hornisse mitten auf die Brust. Aber da geschah das
angsterregende Wunder, da ihr Stachel sich umbog, ohne einzudringen.
Er prallte am Panzer des Rubers ab.

Die Augen der Hornisse funkelten vor Zorn.

Ich knnte dir jetzt deinen Kopf abbeien, Kleine, um dich fr diese
Unverschmtheit zu strafen, sagte sie grimmig, und ich wrde es auch
tun, wenn die Knigin nicht lieber frische Biene e, als tote Biene.
So einen fetten Bissen, wie du es bist, bringt man der Knigin, wenn man
ein guter Soldat ist.

Und sie flog mit Maja in die Luft empor und grade auf die Ruberburg zu.

Nein, das ist zuviel, dachte die arme Biene, das hlt niemand aus. Und
sie verlor die Besinnung.


Als sie nach lngerer Zeit aus ihrer Betubung erwachte war es um sie
her schwl und dmmerig, und die Luft war von einem scharfen
durchdringenden Geruch erfllt, der ihr schrecklicher erschien, als
alles was sie kannte. Langsam besann sie sich, und eine lhmende
Traurigkeit sank in ihr Herz. Sie wollte weinen und konnte nicht.

Noch bin ich nicht gefressen, sagte sie zitternd, aber es kann jeden
Augenblick stattfinden.

Durch die Wnde ihres Kerkers vernahm sie deutlich Stimmen. Nun sah sie
auch, da ein wenig Licht durch eine schmale Spalte fiel. Die Hornissen
bauten ihre Mauern nicht aus Wachs, wie die Bienen, sondern aus einer
trockenen Masse, die wie lockeres graues Papier aussah. Im schmalen
Lichtstreifen, der in ihren Kerker drang, erkannte sie nun auch langsam
ihre Umgebung, und sie erstarrte beinahe vor Schreck, als sie rings
umher Tote liegen sah. Grade zu ihren Fen lag ein kleiner Rosenkfer
auf dem Rcken, und etwas weiter zur Seite erkannte sie das Gerst eines
groen Laufkfers, zur Hlfte durchbrochen, und berall lagen Flgel und
Panzerdecken hingemordeter Bienen.

Ach, da mir dies geschehn mute, wimmerte die kleine Maja. Sie wagte
sich nicht mehr zu rhren und prete sich frierend vor Entsetzen und
Angst in die uerste Ecke der schrecklichen Kammer.

Da hrte sie durch die Wand wieder deutlich die Stimmen der Hornissen,
und von Todesangst getrieben kroch sie an den kleinen Spalt und schaute
hindurch.

Da sah sie einen groen Saal, der ganz mit Hornissen angefllt war und
der von einer groen Anzahl von gefangenen Glhkfern auf das
prchtigste erleuchtet wurde. Auf einem Thron inmitten der Ihren sa die
Knigin. Es schien eine wichtige Beratung stattzufinden, Maja verstand
jedes Wort.

Wenn ihr nur diese glitzernden Ungeheuer nicht solch unsgliches
Entsetzen eingeflt htten, sie wrde sicher ber ihre Kraft und Pracht
in Entzcken geraten sein. Zum erstenmal erkannte sie jetzt deutlich,
wie die Ruber aussahen. Mit Staunen und Zittern sah sie den Prunk der
goldenen Panzer, die den ganzen Leib hinunter mit herrlichen schwarzen
Schienen verziert waren, so da man einen Eindruck von ihnen hatte, wie
wohl ein Kind ihn haben mag, das zum erstenmal einen Tiger erblickt.

Ein Wchter ging an den Wnden des Saals umher und forderte die
Glhkfer auf, aus Leibeskrften zu leuchten. Er tat es leise und
drohend, um die Beratung nicht zu stren, stie mit einer langen Stange
nach ihnen und zischte jedesmal.

Leuchte, sonst fre ich dich!

Es war ganz frchterlich, wie es in der Hornissenburg zuging.

Da hrte Maja die Hornissenknigin sagen:

Also bleibt es bei unserer Abmachung: Morgen, eine Stunde vor
Sonnenaufgang, versammeln sich die Krieger. Die Stadt der Bienen im
Schlopark wird berfallen. Der Stock wird ausgeraubt und mglichst
viele Gefangene werden gemacht. Wer Helene die Achte, die Bienenknigin,
gefangennimmt und mir lebendig berliefert, wird in den Ritterstand
erhoben. Haltet euch tapfer und bringt mir gute Beute heim. Und hiermit
hebe ich die Versammlung auf. Begebt euch zur Ruhe!

Sie erhob sich nach diesen Worten und verlie mit ihrem Gefolge den
Saal.

Die kleine Maja htte beinahe laut aufgeweint.

Mein Volk, schluchzte sie, meine Heimat! Sie prete ihre Hnde in
den Mund, um nicht zu schreien, ihre Verzweiflung war grenzenlos. Ach,
wre ich gestorben, ehe ich dies hren mute, wimmerte sie. Niemand
wird die Meinen warnen. Sie werden im Schlaf berfallen und ermordet.
O lieber Gott, tu ein Wunder, hilf mir, hilf mir und meinem Volk aus
unserer Not.

Im Saal wurden die Glhkferchen ausgelscht und aufgefressen. Es wurde
langsam still in der Burg. An Maja schien niemand mehr zu denken.

Langsam kam ein schwaches Dmmerlicht in ihrem Kerker auf, und ihr war,
als klnge von auen her das Nachtlied der Grillen. Nie war der Biene
etwas furchtbarer erschienen, als dies Burgverlie mit seinen
Totengerippen.




Vierzehntes Kapitel

+Die Flucht+


Aber die Verzweiflung der kleinen Biene machte bald einer entschlossenen
Besinnung Platz. Es war, als erinnerte sie sich wieder daran, da sie
eine Biene war. Hier sitze ich nun und weine und klage, dachte sie
pltzlich, als ob ich nicht Gedanken und Krfte htte. O, ich mache
meinem bedrohten Volk und meiner Knigin wenig Ehre. Sterben mu ich
doch, da will ich es wenigstens stolz und mutig tun und nichts
unversucht lassen, die Meinen zu retten.

Es war, als verge sie ganz die lange Zeit der Trennung von den Ihren
und der Heimat, sie fhlte sich ihnen zugehriger als je, und die groe
Verantwortung, die pltzlich auf ihr ruhte, weil sie den Plan der
Hornissen kannte, verlieh ihr groe Entschlossenheit und viel Mut.

Mssen die Meinen unterliegen und sterben, so will ich es auch, dachte
sie, aber vorher will ich nichts ungetan lassen, sie zu retten.

Es lebe meine Knigin! rief sie.

Ruhe da drinnen! scholl es barsch von auen.

Hu, war das eine frchterliche Stimme. Es mute der Wchter gewesen
sein, der die Runde machte. Offenbar war es lngst Nacht.

Als der Schritt drauen verhallt war, begann Maja sogleich damit, den
Spalt zu erweitern, der in den Saal fhrte. Es gelang ihr leicht, die
mrbe Wand zu zerbeien, wenn sie auch lange Zeit brauchte, bevor die
ffnung gro genug war. Endlich konnte sie sich hindurchzwngen. Sie tat
es vorsichtig und mit pochendem Herzen, sie wute, da es ihr Leben
kosten wrde, wenn man sie entdeckte. Aus unbekannten Grnden der Burg
scholl ein tiefes Schnarchen.

Der Saal lag in gedmpftem blauen Licht, das vom Eingang hineinsank. Das
ist Licht vom Mond, wute Maja und schritt vorsichtig dahin, wobei sie
sich stets in den tiefen Schatten an den Wnden hielt. Vom Saal fhrte
ein schmaler hoher Flur zum Ausgang, von dort kam das Himmelslicht der
Nacht. Maja seufzte tief auf, sie sah ganz fern in unendlicher Weite
einen Stern am Himmel schimmern. Ach Freiheit, dachte sie.

Der Gang war ganz hell. Leise, Schritt fr Schritt, schlich sie voran,
das Tor kam immer nher. Wenn ich jetzt auffliege, dachte sie, so bin
ich drauen. Ihr Herz schlug in der Brust, als ob es sie zersprengen
wollte.

Da sah sie im Schatten des Tores an einer Sule den Wchter lehnen.

Wie angewurzelt blieb sie stehen, alle ihre Hoffnung sank dahin. Dort
war kein Vorberkommen. Was sollte sie tun? Das Beste wird sein, ich
kehre um, dachte sie, aber der Anblick des Riesen am Tor hielt sie im
Bann. Es schien, als schaute er ganz in Gedanken versunken in die
beleuchtete Nachtlandschaft hinaus. Er hatte sein Kinn in die Hand
gesttzt, und sein Kopf war ein wenig geneigt. Wie der goldene Panzer im
Mond glnzte! In seiner Haltung war etwas, das die kleine Maja bewegte.
Er sieht so traurig aus, dachte sie, wie schn er ist, wie edel ist
seine Haltung und wie stolz funkelt seine Rstung. Tag und Nacht legt
er sie nicht ab, er ist immer bereit zu rauben, zu kmpfen und zu
sterben ...

Die kleine Maja verga ganz, da es ihr Feind war, den sie vor sich sah.
Ach, wie oft war es ihr so gegangen, da ihr Herz und seine Freude am
Schnen sie alle Gefahr vergessen lie.

Da scho ein goldener Lichtblitz vom Helm des Rubers, er mute den Kopf
bewegt haben.

Lieber Gott, flsterte die kleine Maja, jetzt ist es aus.

Da sagte der Wchter ganz ruhig:

Komm nur nher, Kleine.

Was? rief Maja, wie? Sie haben mich gesehen?

Doch, Kind, schon lange. Du hast ein Loch in die Wand gebissen, und
hast dich dann, immer hbsch im Schatten, bis hierher bewegt. Dann hast
du mich gesehen und mit deinem Mut war es zu Ende. Ist es so?

Ja, sagte Maja, Sie haben ganz recht. Sie zitterte vor Grauen am
ganzen Krper. Also die ganze Zeit ber hatte der Wchter sie
beobachtet. Sie erinnerte sich nun, davon gehrt zu haben, wie scharf
die Sinne dieser klugen Ruber sind.

Was willst du denn hier? fragte der Wchter gutmtig. Maja fand immer
noch, da er traurig aussah, er schien an ganz andere Dinge zu denken,
ihm war dies alles gar nicht so wichtig wie ihr selbst.

Hinaus mchte ich, antwortete sie. Ich habe auch nicht den Mut
verloren, sondern ich war nur erschrocken ber Ihre Kraft und Schnheit
und ber den goldenen Glanz Ihrer Rstung. Jetzt werde ich mit Ihnen
kmpfen.

Der Wchter beugte sich erstaunt ein wenig vor und sah Maja an und
lchelte. Es war gar nicht bse, dies Lcheln, die kleine Biene hatte
dabei ein Empfinden, das sie noch niemals im Leben gekannt hatte. Ihr
war zumute, als ob dieses Lcheln des jungen Kriegers eine heimliche
Gewalt ber ihr Herz ausbte.

Kleine, sagte er beinahe herzlich, nein, kmpfen werden wir nicht.
Ihr seid ein mchtiges Volk, aber wir sind strker. Am wenigsten aber
wird je eine einzelne Hornisse mit einer einzelnen Biene kmpfen.
-- Wenn du magst, kannst du gern ein wenig hierbleiben und mit mir
plaudern. Aber nur noch kurz, bald werde ich die Soldaten wecken und
dann mut du in deine Zelle zurck.

Seltsam, diese berlegene Freundlichkeit der Hornisse entwaffnete Maja
mehr, als Zorn oder Ha es gekonnt htten. Es war beinahe etwas wie
Bewunderung, das sie empfand. Sie sah mit groen traurigen Augen zu
ihrem Feind auf, und da sie immer dem Zug ihres Herzens folgen mute,
sagte sie:

Ich habe stets nur Bses von den Hornissen gehrt, aber Sie sind nicht
bse. Ich kann nicht glauben, da Sie bse sind.

Der Krieger sah Maja ruhig an:

Es gibt berall bse und gute Leute, sagte er ernst. Aber wir sind
eure Feinde, das vergi nicht. Es wird immer so bleiben.

Mu denn ein Feind immer schlecht sein? fragte Maja. Als Sie vorhin
in die Nacht hinausschauten, habe ich vergessen mssen, da Sie hart und
mir feindlich sind. Mir war zumute, als ob Sie traurig wren, und ich
habe immer gemeint, Wesen, die traurig sind, knnen unmglich bse
sein.

Und als der Wchter schwieg, fuhr Maja um vieles mutiger fort:

Sie sind mchtig. Wenn Sie wollen, knnen Sie mich wieder in meine
Zelle schaffen und ich mu sterben, aber wenn Sie wollen, so knnen Sie
mir auch meine Freiheit schenken.

Da richtete der Krieger sich auf. Sein Panzer klirrte ein wenig, und der
Arm, den er hob, blinkte im Mondlicht, das verblassend auf dem Tor lag.
Kam schon der Morgen?

Du hast ganz recht, sagte er, diese Macht habe ich. Diese Macht ist
mir von meinem Volk und meiner Knigin anvertraut worden. Der Befehl
lautet, da keine Biene je wieder die Burg lebendig verlassen darf, die
sie einmal betreten hat. Ich werde meinem Volk Treue halten. Und nach
einer Weile des Schweigens fgte er leiser hinzu, als sprche er zu sich
selbst: Ich habe zu bitter erfahren, wie weh die Untreue tun kann, als
Schnuck mich verlie ...

Die kleine Maja stand erschttert und wute nichts zu antworten. Ach,
sie selber trieb das gleiche Gefhl, die Liebe zu den Ihren, die Treue
gegen ihr Volk. Sie fhlte, hier gab es kein anderes Mittel mehr als
List oder Gewalt, es tat jeder seine Pflicht und doch blieben sie
einander fremd und feind. -- Aber hatte der Krieger nicht zuletzt einen
Namen genannt? Hatte er nicht von einer Untreue gesprochen, die jemand
gegen ihn begangen hatte? Schnuck kannte sie ja, war das nicht die
schne Libelle gewesen, die am Seeufer bei den Wasserrosen wohnte? Sie
bebte vor Aufregung, vielleicht lag hier eine Rettung fr sie, aber sie
wute noch nicht, inwiefern. Vorsichtig fragte sie:

Wer ist denn Schnuck, wenn ich fragen darf?

Ach, das kmmert dich nicht, Kleine, antwortete der Wchter, sie ist
fr mich verloren und ich werde sie nie mehr finden.

Ich kenne Schnuck, sagte Maja und zwang sich zur Gelassenheit, sie
gehrt zur Familie der Libellen und ist wahrscheinlich die schnste, die
es unter ihnen gibt.

Maja hatte den Krieger noch nicht so gesehen, wie nach diesen Worten, er
schien alles um sich her vergessen zu haben und sprang strmisch auf sie
zu.

Wie? rief er, du kennst Schnuck? Sofort sagst du, wo sie ist.

Nein, sagte die kleine Maja, ganz still und fest. Aber innerlich
glhte sie vor Freude.

Ich beie dir den Kopf ab, wenn du nicht sprichst, rief der Wchter.
Er kam ganz nahe.

Der wird mir ja sowieso abgebissen. Tun Sies nur! Ich werde doch nicht
die liebliche Libelle verraten, mit der ich eng befreundet bin!
Jedenfalls wollen Sie sie gefangennehmen.

Der Krieger atmete schwer. Da es drauen zu dmmern begann, sah Maja,
da seine Stirn bleich war und seine Augen voll Angst und Unfrieden.

Mein Gott, sagte er verstrt, es ist Zeit, ich mu die Krieger
wecken. -- Nein, nein, kleine Biene, ich will Schnuck nichts Bses tun.
Ich liebe Schnuck mehr als mein Leben. Sag mir, wo ich sie wiederfinde!

Ich liebe mein Leben auch, sagte die kleine Maja klug und zgernd.

Wenn du mir den Aufenthalt der Libelle Schnuck verrtst, sagte der
Wchter und Maja sah, da er mhsam sprach und am ganzen Krper
zitterte, so werde ich dich freigeben, dann kannst du fliegen, wohin du
willst.

Werden Sie Wort halten?

Mein Ehrenwort als Ruber, sagte der Wchter stolz.

Die kleine Maja konnte kaum sprechen. Kam es nicht auf jede einzelne
Minute an, wenn sie die Ihren noch rechtzeitig vor dem berfall warnen
wollte? Aber ihr Herz jubelte.

Gut, sagte sie. Ich glaube Ihnen. So hren Sie: Kennen Sie die alten
Linden beim Schlo? Hinter ihnen ziehen sich viele Blumenwiesen hin und
endlich kommt ein groer See. Im Seewinkel im Sden, wo der Bach
einmndet, stehen in der Sonne die weien Seerosen im Wasser. Dort im
Schilf wohnt Schnuck, Sie finden sie jeden Mittag dort, wenn die Sonne
hoch steht.

Der Krieger hatte beide Hnde an seine blasse Stirn gedrckt. Er schien
schwer mit sich selbst zu kmpfen.

Du hast recht, sagte er leise und sthnte so, da man nicht sagen
konnte, ob er Schmerz oder Freude empfand. Sie hat mir erzhlt, sie
wollte zu weien schwimmenden Blumen. Das werden die Blumen sein, von
denen du gesprochen hast. So flieg denn, und hab Dank!

Und wirklich trat er vom Eingang zurck. Drauen dmmerte der Tag
herauf.

Ein Ruber hlt sein Wort, sagte er. Er wute nicht, was die kleine
Maja in dieser Nacht in der Burg gehrt hatte, und so dachte er: Was
liegt an einer kleinen Biene, gibt es nicht genug andere?

Leben Sie wohl, rief Maja und flog davon, atemlos vor Hast und ohne
ein Wort des Dankes. Es war wirklich keine Zeit mehr dazu.




Fnfzehntes Kapitel

+Die Heimkehr+


Die kleine Maja nahm ihre ganzen Krfte zusammen, alles an Willen und
Tatkraft, was ihr geblieben war. Wie eine Kugel aus dem Lauf einer
Jagdbchse flog sie blitzschnell schnurgrade durch die bluliche
Morgenluft dahin, grade auf den Wald zu. Die Bienen knnen rascher
fliegen als die meisten anderen Insekten. Dort war sie zunchst sicher,
dort konnte sie sich verstecken, falls die Hornisse bereuen sollte, sie
freigegeben zu haben, und ihr folgte.

Aus den Bumen fielen schwere Tropfen in die welken Bltter des
Waldbodens. Es war so kalt, da der Biene die Flgel zu erstarren
drohten. berall lagen feine Schleier in der Ebene, und vom Morgenrot
war nichts zu sehen. Dabei war es so still in der Runde, als habe die
Sonne die Erde vergessen und als htten alle Wesen sich zu einem
Todesschlaf niedergelegt. Da flog Maja so hoch empor in die Luft als sie
konnte. Es galt fr sie nur eines: sie mute so rasch als ihre Krfte
und Sinne zulieen, den Stock der Ihren finden, ihr Volk, ihre bedrohte
Heimat. Sie mute die Ihren warnen, da sie sich gegen den berfall
rsten konnten, den die furchtbaren Ruber an diesem Morgen planten.
O, das Volk der Bienen war stark und wohl befhigt, den Kampf mit den
berlegenen Gegnern aufzunehmen, wenn sie sich wappnen konnten und zur
Verteidigung vorbereiten. Niemals aber, wenn sie berrumpelt und im
Erwachen berfallen wurden. Wenn die Knigin und die Soldaten noch
schliefen, dann wrde es ein furchtbares Morden geben und viele
Gefangene, und der Erfolg der Hornissen war gewi. Und nun, da die
kleine Biene an die Kraft und die Strke der Ihren dachte, an ihre
Todesbereitschaft und ihre Treue gegen die Knigin, berkam sie ein
hoher Zorn gegen die Feinde und zugleich ein beseligter Opferwille und
ein beglckender Mut ihrer begeisterten Liebe.

Es war nicht leicht fr sie, sich in der Umgegend zurechtzufinden. Sie
hatte sich schon seit lange nicht mehr auf jene Art das Land gemerkt,
wie die anderen Bienen es gewohnt waren, die immer von weiten Ausflgen
mit ihrer Honigtracht zum Stock zurckfinden muten.

Ihr war, als sei sie noch niemals so hoch in der Luft gewesen, wie nun,
die Khle tat ihr weh, und sie konnte die einzelnen Gegenstnde drunten
kaum noch deutlich unterscheiden. Worauf soll ich mich verlassen, dachte
sie, ich habe keinen Anhalt und werde den Meinen keine Hilfe bringen
knnen. Ach, hier war nun die beste Gelegenheit, alles gutzumachen,
seufzte sie in ihrer Angst, was soll ich tun? Aber pltzlich trieb es
sie mit heimlichen Mchten unwiderstehlich nach einer bestimmten
Richtung hin. Was ist es nur, das mich drngt und zieht, dachte sie,
es mu mein Heimweh sein, das mich fhrt. Und sie berlie sich diesem
Gefhl und flog so rasch sie konnte gradeaus. Und pltzlich brach sie in
helles Jubeln aus, dort schimmerten fern wie graue Kuppeln aus der
Dmmerung die Baumkronen der groen Linden des Schloparks. Nun wute
sie sich zurechtzufinden und augenblicklich lie sie sich bis dicht ber
die Erde nieder. Sie sah auf den Wiesen zur Seite die hellen
Nebelstriche wieder dichter und dachte an die Blumenelfen, die dort
getrost und selig ihren frhen Tod starben. Das fllte ihr das Herz aufs
neue mit Zuversicht, und ihre Angst verlor sich. Mochten die Ihren sie
wegen ihrer Flucht aus dem Reiche verachten, mochte die Knigin sie
strafen, wenn nur ihr Volk von dem furchtbaren Unheil verschont blieb,
das ihm drohte.

Dort schimmerte schon dicht an der langen Steinmauer die Blautanne, die
die Bienenstadt der Ihren gegen den Westwind schtzte, und nun sah sie
die bekannten Fluglcher, die roten, blauen und grnen Tore ihrer Heimat
leuchten. Ihr Herz schlug so strmisch, da sie glaubte, ihr Atem mte
ihr vergehn, aber sie hielt aus und steuerte grade auf den Eingang des
roten Tors zu; dort fhrte es zu ihrem Volk und zu ihrer Knigin.

Als sie sich auf dem Flugbrett vor dem Tore niederlie, vertraten ihr
die beiden Wchter den Eingang und ergriffen sie sogleich. Maja konnte
in ihrer Atemlosigkeit anfangs kein Wort hervorbringen, und die Wachen
machten Miene, sie zu tten. Denn es ist den Bienen bei Todesstrafe
verboten, in eine fremde Stadt zu dringen ohne den Willen der Knigin.

Zurck! rief der Wchter und stie sie rauh vor sich her, was kommt
Ihnen in den Sinn?! Wenn Sie nicht augenblicklich umkehren, ist es um
Sie geschehen. Und dem anderen Wchter zugewandt, sagte er: Ist dir
schon einmal so etwas vorgekommen, und noch dazu vor Tagesanbruch?

Da rief Maja das Losungswort ihres Volks, woran alle Bienen die Ihren
erkannten, und die Wchter lieen sie augenblicklich los.

Was ist das?! riefen sie, du bist eine der Unsrigen, und wir kennen
dich nicht?

Lat mich vor die Knigin, sthnte die kleine Maja, gleich, rasch,
es droht groes Unheil.

Die Wchter zgerten noch, sie verstanden nicht, was vor sich ging.

Die Knigin darf nicht vor Sonnenaufgang geweckt werden, sagte der
eine von ihnen.

Da schrie Maja so laut und leidenschaftlich, wie die beiden wohl niemals
eine Biene haben schreien hren:

So erwacht die Knigin vielleicht nie mehr zum Leben! Der Tod folgt mir
auf dem Fu. Und sie fgte so wild und zornig hinzu: Ihr sollt mich
vor die Knigin fhren! da die Wchter ganz erschrocken und tief
ergriffen gehorchten.

Nun eilten sie miteinander durch die warmen, vertrauten Straen und
Gnge, die Maja alle wiedererkannte, und obgleich ihre Erregung und Hast
sie fast berwltigten, zitterte doch ihr Herz vor Wehmut unter den
Wohltaten ihrer Heimat.

Ich bin zu Hause, stammelte sie mit blassen Lippen.

Im Empfangssaal der Knigin brach sie beinahe zusammen. Einer der
Wchter sttzte sie, whrend der andere mit der ungewhnlichen Botschaft
in die Gemcher der Knigin eilte. Sie hatten nun beide erkannt, da
etwas ganz Auerordentliches im Anzuge war, und der Bote lief so rasch,
als seine Fe ihn trugen.

Die ersten Wachsbereiterinnen waren schon auf, neugierig schaute hier
und da ein Kpfchen durch die Eingnge, die Nachricht dieses Vorfalls
verbreitete sich schnell.

Da kamen zwei Offiziere aus den Gemchern der Knigin. Maja erkannte sie
sogleich, sie nahmen ernst und schweigend am Eingang ihre Stellungen
ein, ohne Maja anzureden; nun mute gleich die Knigin erscheinen.

Sie kam ohne ihren Hofstaat, nur in Begleitung zweier Dienerinnen und
ihres Leibadjutanten. Als sie Maja sah, trat sie schnell auf sie zu, und
da sie den argen Zustand und die groe Erregung der kleinen Biene sah,
verlor sich der Zug von Ernst und Strenge ein wenig, der in ihrem
Gesicht gelegen hatte.

Du kommst mit einer wichtigen Botschaft? fragte sie ruhig. Wer bist
du?

Maja konnte nicht gleich sprechen. Endlich brachte sie mhsam nur die
Worte hervor:

Die Hornissen!

Die Knigin erbleichte, aber sie blieb gefat, und das beruhigte auch
Maja ein wenig.

Gromchtige Knigin, rief sie, vergib mir, da ich die Pflichten
nicht beachte, die deine Hoheit und Wrde erheischen, ich will spter
alles sagen, was ich getan habe und was ich von Herzen bereue. Ich bin
in dieser Nacht wie durch ein Wunder der Gefangenschaft der Hornissen
entronnen, und das letzte, was ich von ihnen gehrt habe, ist, da in
der Morgendmmerung dieses Tages unser Reich berfallen und ausgeraubt
werden soll!

Das Entsetzen, das diese Worte der kleinen Maja bei allen Anwesenden
hervorriefen, lt sich kaum schildern. Die beiden Dienerinnen, die die
Knigin begleiteten, brachen in lautes Jammern aus, und die Offiziere am
Eingang machten Miene, bleich vor Schreck, davonzufliegen und Alarm zu
schlagen. Der Adjutant sagte: Ja Herrgott ..., und drehte sich einmal
um sich selbst, weil er sich nach allen Seiten zugleich umsehen wollte.

Es war wirklich ein ganz auerordentlicher Anblick, zu sehen, mit
welcher Ruhe und Geisteskraft die Knigin die furchtbare Nachricht
aufnahm. Sie reckte sich ein wenig empor, und in ihre Haltung kam etwas,
was alle einschchterte und ihnen zugleich ein grenzenloses Vertrauen
einflte. Die kleine Maja zitterte vor Erhobenheit, so etwas
Bedeutungsvolles an berlegenheit glaubte sie noch niemals gesehen zu
haben. Und die Knigin winkte die Offiziere an ihre Seite und sprach
laut und gefat ein paar rasche Stze zu ihnen. Maja hrte zum Schlu
noch die Worte: Ich gebe euch eine Minute zur Ausfhrung meines
Befehls, wenn es lnger dauert, kostet es euren Kopf. Aber die beiden
Offiziere sahen gar nicht so aus, als ob man sie anfeuern mte; sie
strmten davon, da es eine Freude zu sehen war.

O, meine Knigin, sagte die kleine Maja.

Da neigte sich die Knigin noch fr einen kleinen Augenblick zu Maja
nieder, noch einmal fr kurze Zeit sah die kleine Biene das Angesicht
ihrer Frstin milde und voll Liebe erstrahlen.

Hab Dank, sagte sie zu Maja, du hast uns alle gerettet, was immer
vorher geschehen sein mag, du hast es tausendfltig gut gemacht. Aber
nun geh und ruh dich aus, mein Herzchen, du siehst elend aus, und deine
Hnde zittern.

Ich mchte fr dich sterben, stammelte Maja bebend.

Da antwortete die Knigin:

Sei nun ohne Sorge um uns. Unter all den Tausenden, die diese Stadt
bewohnen, ist nicht eine einzige, die nicht ohne Besinnen ihr Leben fr
das Wohl der anderen und fr mein Wohl hingeben wrde. Du kannst ruhig
schlafen.

Sie beugte sich zu der kleinen Maja nieder und kte sie auf ihre Stirn,
dann winkte sie ihren Dienerinnen und befahl ihnen, fr das Wohl und die
Ruhe Majas Sorge zu tragen.

Die kleine Biene lie sich willenlos und tief von Herzen beglckt
davonfhren. Ihr war zumute, als habe ihr das Leben nun nichts Schneres
mehr zu geben. Sie hrte wie im Traum noch in der Ferne hohe helle
Signalrufe, sah wie die Wrdentrger des Staates sich um die Eingnge
der Knigsgemcher drngten, und dann vernahm sie ein dumpfes,
weithinhallendes Drhnen, das den ganzen Stock erschtterte.

Die Soldaten! Unsere Soldaten! flsterte neben ihr die Dienerin.

Das letzte, was sie in der kleinen stillen Kammer hrte, in der ihre
Begleiterinnen sie zur Ruhe betteten, war dicht unter ihrer Tr der
Marschschritt vorbeieilender Truppen. Sie vernahm eine klare
Kommandostimme, die froh und zuversichtlich klang, und in ihren ersten
Traum hinein tnte das alte Soldatenlied der Bienen, und sie hrte,
verklingend wie aus weiter Ferne:

  Sonne, goldne Sonne du
  leuchte unserm Treiben.
  Segne unsere Knigin,
  la uns einig bleiben.




Sechzehntes Kapitel

+Die Schlacht der Bienen und Hornissen+


Es herrschte eine ungeheuere Erregung im Reich der Bienen. Selbst in den
Tagen der Revolution war der Aufruhr nicht so gro gewesen. Der Stock
brauste. Es war nicht eine Biene, die nicht von einem heiligen Zorn der
Emprung befallen war und von glhendem Verlangen, den alten Todfeinden
mit ganzer Kraft zu begegnen. Und doch traten weder Verwirrung noch
Unordnung ein, es war gradezu erstaunlich, wie rasch die Regimenter sich
gesammelt hatten und wie gut jeder wute, was seine Pflicht war und
wodurch er sich ntzlich machen konnte.

Allerdings war es die hchste Zeit. Als auf den Ruf der Knigin die
Freiwilligen vortraten, die sich als erste zu der Verteidigung des
Eingangs hergaben, kamen rasch wie sausende Pnktchen die ersten
Botschafter zurck, die ausgesandt worden waren und nun meldeten, da
die Hornissen nahten. Es trat eine furchtbare Ruhe der Erwartung ein.
Mit gefatem Ernst und bleich vor Stolz, standen die ersten Soldaten
hart am Eingang in drei geschlossenen Reihen. Keiner sprach mehr, es war
totenstill umher. Nur im Hintergrund hrte man die leisen Kommandorufe
der Offiziere, die die Reserven ordneten. Es schien, als schliefe der
Stock. Nur am Tor arbeiteten leise und fieberhaft noch etwa ein Dutzend
Wachsbereiterinnen, die den Befehl erhalten hatten, den Eingang mit
Wachs zu verengen. Wie durch ein Wunder waren in den wenig Minuten zwei
dicke Wachswnde entstanden, die auch die strkste Hornisse nicht ohne
Zeitverlust zerstren konnte. Das Flugloch war fast um die Hlfte
verkleinert worden.

Die Knigin hatte einen Posten inne, von dem aus sie in der Lage war,
den Kampf zu berblicken. Ihre Adjutanten eilten und flogen hin und her.
Nun war schon der dritte Kundschafter zurck. Er sank vllig erschpft
vor der Knigin nieder.

Ich bin der Letzte, der zurckkommt, schrie er mit uerster
Anstrengung, die andern sind tot.

Wo sind die Hornissen? fragte die Knigin.

Bei den Linden, rief er, und dann stammelte er in Todesangst: Hrt,
hrt! die Luft saust von den Flgeln der Riesen!

Es war nichts zu hren. Es mute seine Angst sein, da er immer noch
glaubte, verfolgt zu werden.

Wie viele sind es? fragte die Knigin streng, sprich leise.

Ich habe vierzig gezhlt, flsterte der Botschafter, und obgleich die
Knigin ber die Strke des Feindes erschrak, sagte sie doch laut und
zuversichtlich:

Es wird keine von ihnen ihre Heimat wiedersehen.

Die Worte der Knigin wirkten auf die Soldaten und Offiziere wie eine
furchtbare Wahrsagung zum Unheil des Feindes, und der Mut aller hob
sich.

Als aber nun drauen in der stillen Morgenluft erst leise und dann
lauter und lauter ein scharfes unheilvolles Surren entstand, als der
Eingang sich verdunkelte und alle deutlich die schrecklichen
Flsterstimmen dieser grausamsten Ruber und Mrder vernahmen, die es in
der Welt der Insekten gibt, da erbleichten die Angesichter der kleinen
mutigen Bienen, als ob ein fahler Lichtschein ber die Reihen snke. Sie
sahen einander mit Augen an, in denen der Tod wartete, und die ersten
wuten, da keine Minute mehr vergehen wrde, bis sie ihr Leben gelassen
hatten.

Da klang die gefate Stimme der Knigin ruhig und klar aus der Hhe:

Lat die Ruber eindringen, einen nach dem andern, bis ihr meinen
Befehl hrt, dann strzen die ersten Reihen, je hundert zugleich, sich
auf die Eingedrungenen, und die hinteren Reihen decken den Eingang. Auf
diese Art teilen wir die Streitmacht des Feindes. Bedenkt ihr Ersten,
von eurer Kraft und Ausdauer und von eurem Mut hngt das Wohl des ganzen
Staates ab. Aber seid getrost, die Feinde werden im Dmmerlicht nicht
sogleich erkennen, wie wohl wir gerstet sind und arglos eindringen ...

Sie brach ihre Worte ab, denn im Tor erschien der Kopf des ersten
Rubers. Tastend und vorsichtig spielten die Fhler, die Zangen ffneten
und schlossen sich, da einem das Blut erstarren konnte, und langsam
schob der ungeheure getigerte Leib mit seinen starken Flgeln sich nach.
Der Panzer funkelte im Licht, das von auen eindrang.

Es ging wie ein Zittern durch die Reihen der Bienen, aber kein Laut war
vernehmbar.

Die Hornisse trat leise zurck, und man hrte ihre Meldung:

Der Stock schlft! Aber der Eingang ist halb vermauert und es sind
keine Wchter da. Ich wei nicht, ob das ein gutes oder ein schlechtes
Zeichen ist.

Ein gutes! klang es von auen, vorwrts!

Da sprangen zwei Riesen nebeneinander hinein, lautlos drngte es
flimmernd, getigert und gepanzert nach. Es war frchterlich anzuschauen.
Nun waren schon acht der Ruber im Stock und immer noch erklang kein
Befehl der Knigin. War sie vor Entsetzen erstarrt, da ihre Stimme
versagte? Sahen denn die Ruber immer noch nicht, da zur Rechten und
zur Linken dicht gedrngt und todesbereit im Schatten die glitzernden
Reihen der Soldaten standen ...

Da klang es laut aus der Hhe:

Im Namen eines ewigen Rechts und im Namen der Knigin, verteidigt das
Reich!

Da erhob sich ein Brausen und fllte die Luft, wie noch kein
Kriegsgeschrei die Stadt erschttert hatte. Es erschien, als msse der
ganze Stock durch dies tobende Brummen zersprengt werden, und wo eben
noch klar gesondert die einzelnen Hornissen kenntlich gewesen waren,
wlzten sich nun in dichten, dunklen Knueln brausende Haufen. Ein
junger Offizier der Bienen hatte kaum das Ende des Kommandos abgewartet.
Er wollte der erste sein, der angriff, und er war der erste, der starb.
Er hatte schon eine Weile bebend vor Kampfeslust, zum Sprung bereit
dagestanden, und als ber ihm das erste Wort des Befehls laut wurde,
strmte er vor, gerade dem vordersten Ruber in die Fnge, und sein
feiner, unendlich spitzer Stachel fand den Weg zwischen dem Kopf und dem
Brustring in den Hals seines Gegners. Er sah noch, wie die Hornisse sich
mit einem wtenden Aufschrei zusammenkrmmte, so da sie fr einen
Augenblick wie eine gelbschwarze, glitzernde Kugel erschien, dann drang
der furchtbare Stachel des Rubers dem jungen Offizier durch die
Brustringe ins Herz, und sterbend sah er sich und den tdlich
getroffenen Feind in einer Wolke der Seinen versinken. Sein khner
Soldatentod hatte allen die wilde Seligkeit einer hohen
Todesbereitschaft ins Herz gesenkt, und der Ansturm der Bienen wurde zu
einer furchtbaren Not fr die Eindringlinge.

Aber die Hornissen sind ein altes, kampfgewohntes Rubervolk, und Morden
und Rauben ist ihnen lngst zum grausigen Handwerk geworden. Wenn auch
der erste Anprall der Bienen sie verwirrt und versprengt hatte, so
bedeutete er nicht so viel an Schaden, als es anfangs erscheinen mochte.
Denn die Stachel der Bienen drangen nicht durch die Panzer der Riesen,
und die Kraft und Gre der Hornissen gab ihnen eine berlegenheit,
derer sie sich wohl bewut waren. Ihre durchdringenden, surrenden
Kampfrufe, vor denen alle Wesen in Entsetzen geraten, die sie hren,
berhallten das Kriegsgeschrei der Bienen. Frchten doch sogar die
Menschen diesen Warnruf der Hornissen und weichen ihnen lieber aus, ehe
sie ungewappnet den Kampf mit ihnen wagen.

Die berfallenen Hornissen, die bereits in den Stock eingedrungen waren,
erkannten rasch, da sie vor allen Dingen vordringen muten, um den
Ihren drauen nicht selbst den Eingang zu sperren. Und so wlzten sich
die kmpfenden Knuel voran in die dunklen Straen und Gnge. Wie
richtig war der Befehl der Knigin gewesen, denn kaum war ein wenig
Platz am Eingang entstanden, da strzten die hinteren Reihen der
Soldaten vor, um ihn zu verteidigen. Es war eine altbewhrte und
furchtbare Kampfweise, die befolgt wurde. Kaum hatte eine Hornisse sich
am Eingang im Kampfe ermdet, so taten die Bienen, als seien sie selbst
erschpft, und lieen den Ruber eindringen. Aber stets gelang es nur
dieser einen Hornisse in die Stadt zu gelangen, denn kaum drngte die
zweite nach, so strzte sich auch schon ein dichter Schwarm neuer
Soldaten auf das scheinbar unverteidigte Tor. Und der eingedrungene
Gegner, der vom Kampf ermdet war, sah sich pltzlich den glitzernden
Reihen ganz neuer Bienenkrieger gegenber, die noch kein Glied im Kampf
gerhrt hatten, und meist erlag er schon im ersten Ansturm ihrer
bermacht.

Aber in die Kampfrufe mischten sich nun schon seit lange das
Todesgeschrei der Sterbenden, das Jammern der Verwundeten und ein
wildes, schmerzvolles Sthnen voll Todesangst und Abschiedsweh. Die
furchtbaren Stachel der Hornissen hatten in der entsetzlichsten Weise
unter den Bienen gewtet. Die wlzenden Haufen der Kmpfenden im Stock
lieen eine ganze Bahn von Toten zurck. Die eingeschlossenen Hornissen
hatten erkannt, da ihnen der Ausweg abgeschnitten war, und da wohl
keine von ihnen das Tageslicht wieder erblicken wrde. So kmpften sie
einen furchtbaren Verzweiflungskampf. Aber langsam erlagen sie doch,
eine nach der anderen, denn es trat ein Umstand ein, der den Bienen sehr
zugunsten kam, erschpfte sich auch die Kraft der Riesen nicht so rasch,
so erschpfte sich doch das Gift ihrer Stachel und ihre Stiche wirkten
nicht mehr tdlich. Die verwundeten Bienen wuten jetzt, da sie sich
erholen wrden, das gab ihnen ein ganz neues Siegesbewutsein, zu dem
der Schmerz um ihre Toten kam, der ihnen hchste Krfte des Zorns
verlieh.

Langsam wurde es stiller. Die lauten Zurufe der Hornissen vor dem Stock
fanden keinen Widerhall mehr bei den eingedrungenen Gefhrten.

Sie sind alle tot, sagte die Fhrerin der Hornissen in grimmigem
Schmerz und rief die Kmpfenden vom Tor zurck. Ihre Schar war auf die
Hlfte zusammengeschmolzen. Bis zu ihnen hinaus tnte das Drhnen des
zornigen Bienenstocks.

Es mu Verrat vorliegen, sagte die Fhrerin wieder, die Bienen waren
vorbereitet.

Sie hatten sich auf der Blautanne versammelt. Es war langsam immer
heller geworden, und das Morgenrot vergoldete schon die Wipfel der
Linden. Die Vogelrufe wurden laut, und der Tau fiel. Bleich und vor
Kampfeswut zitternd standen die Krieger um ihre Fhrerin, die innerlich
mit sich rang, ob sie ihrer Raublust oder ihrer Klugheit gehorchen
sollte. Nein, sie sah ein, es ging nicht an, der ganze Stamm der Ihren
war in Gefahr, aufgerieben zu werden. Und mit Widerwillen und vor
beleidigtem Ehrgeiz bebend, beschlo sie, einen Boten an die Bienen zu
senden, um die Eingeschlossenen zu retten.

Sie whlte den klgsten ihrer Offiziere, den sie kannte, und rief seinen
Namen.

Ein bedrcktes Schweigen war die Antwort. Er war unter den
Eingeschlossenen.

Da whlte sie einen andern, rasch und angstvoll, pltzlich berkam sie
eine Todesangst um die Ihren, die nicht zurckkehrten. Das Toben der
Bienenstadt war weithin vernehmbar.

Eile dich! rief sie und gab dem Friedensboten ein weies Jasminblatt
in die Hand, sonst kommen am Ende noch die Menschen, und wir sind
verloren. Sag ihnen, wir wrden davonziehen und ihren Stock fr immer
verschonen, wenn sie die Eingeschlossenen ausliefern wrden.

Der Bote strzte davon, schwenkte vor dem Tor sein weies Blatt und lie
sich am Flugbrett nieder.

Sofort wurde der Bienenknigin die Nachricht gebracht, es sei ein
Abgesandter da, der verhandeln wollte, und die Herrscherin schickte ihm
ihre Adjutanten. Als ihr die Kunde gebracht wurde, lie sie die Antwort
sagen:

Wir Bienen liefern die Toten aus, wenn ihr sie mit euch nehmen wollt.
Gefangene sind nicht gemacht. Die Euren, die eingedrungen sind, sind
alle tot. Euerm Versprechen, nicht wiederzukommen, glauben wir nicht.
Ihr knnt wiederkommen, wann ihr wollt, es wird euch niemals besser
gehen als heute, und wenn ihr jetzt fortkmpfen wollt, so findet ihr uns
bis auf den letzten Mann bereit.

Die Fhrerin der Hornissen erbleichte, als sie diese Kunde vernahm. Mit
geballten Fusten kmpfte sie einen schweren inneren Kampf. Gar zu gern
htte sie dem Wunsch ihrer Krieger Folge geleistet, die um Rache
schrien. Aber ihre Vernunft siegte.

Wir kommen wieder, knirschte sie. Wie konnte uns dies geschehen? Sind
wir nicht strker und mchtiger, als das Volk der Bienen? Noch ist mir
jeder Feldzug zu unserm Ruhm geglckt. Wie soll ich nach dieser
Niederlage vor unsere Knigin treten? Und wutbebend wiederholte sie:
Woran liegt das, was ist hier geschehen? Das kann nur Verrat sein.

Da antwortete eine ltere Hornisse, die als eine Freundin der Knigin
galt:

Wir sind wohl strker und mchtiger, aber das Volk der Bienen ist einig
und treu. Das ist eine groe Macht, der niemand widerstehen kann. Keine
wrde ihr Volk verraten, jede dient zuerst dem Wohl aller.

Die Fhrerin hrte kaum zu.

Mein Tag wird kommen, knirschte sie. Was schert mich die Weisheit
dieser Kleinbrger. Ich bin ein Ruber und will als Ruber sterben. Aber
hier wre kmpfen Wahnsinn. Was ntzt es uns, wenn wir den ganzen
Bienenstock vernichten und keiner von uns kme zurck? Und an den Boten
gewandt, rief sie:

Verlange die Toten. Wir ziehen.

Es antwortete ihr ein dumpfes Schweigen. Der Wchter flog davon. --

Wir mssen mit einer neuen Tcke rechnen, obgleich ich nicht glaube,
da die Hornissen noch groe Kampfeslust haben, sagte die
Bienenknigin, als sie diesen Entschlu der Feinde hrte. Sie befahl,
da zwei neue Abteilungen Krieger den Eingang zu decken htten und da
die Wachsbereiterinnen und Trgerinnen und die Nachhut die Toten aus der
Stadt schaffen sollten.

Und so geschah es. ber Berge von Toten hin wurde eine Ruberleiche nach
der andern langsam zum Eingang geschafft und hinabgeworfen. In dsterem
Schweigen verharrte drben die Schar der Hornissen auf der Blautanne und
sah die Krper der Gefallenen einen nach dem anderen zu Boden sinken.
Es war ein Bild von grenzenloser Trauer, das die heraufsteigende Sonne
beschien. Einundzwanzig Gefallene, die einen ruhmvollen Tod gestorben
waren, huften sich im Gras unter der geretteten Stadt. Kein Trpflein
Honig und keine Gefangenen gingen in die Hnde des Feindes ber. Die
Hornissen ergriffen ihre Toten und flogen davon, die Schlacht war
beendet, und das Volk der Bienen hatte gesiegt.

Aber welche Opfer hatte dieser Sieg gekostet! berall lagen Tote umher,
in den Straen und Gngen und den dmmerigen Pltzen vor den Brut- und
Honigschrnken. Es gab eine traurige Arbeit im Stock an diesem schnen
Sommermorgen voll Blumenblhen und Sonnenschein. Die Toten muten
hinausgeschafft und die Verwundeten verbunden und gepflegt werden. Aber
bevor der Mittag heraufzog, begann schon wieder die gewohnte Arbeit im
Stock. Denn die Bienen feierten weder ihren Sieg, noch trauerten sie
lange Zeit um ihre Toten. Ein jeder trug seinen Stolz und seinen Schmerz
still mit sich herum und ging seiner Pflicht und Arbeit nach. Es ist ein
seltsames Volk, das Volk der Bienen.




Siebzehntes Kapitel

+Die Freundin der Knigin+


Die kleine Maja war aus ihrem kurzen Schlaf der Betubung erwacht, als
der Kampfeslrm losbrach. Augenblicklich richtete sie sich auf und
wollte hinausstrmen, um sich an der Verteidigung der Stadt zu
beteiligen, aber da merkte sie, da ihre Krfte versagten und da sie
keine Hilfe leisten konnte.

Eine Gruppe der Kmpfenden wlzte sich in ihre Nhe. Es war eine junge,
starke Hornisse, ihres Abzeichens ein Offizier, wie es Maja schien, die
sich gegen eine gewaltige bermacht von Bienen ganz allein verteidigte.
Langsam wlzte das Knuel sich nher. Maja sah mit Entsetzen, wie eine
Biene nach der andern sterbend zurckblieb. Aber der Riese war zu sehr
behindert. An seinen Armen, Beinen und Fhlern hingen Scharen von
Soldaten, die sich eher tten lieen, ehe sie ihn freigaben. Und schon
drangen die ersten Bienenstiche ihm zwischen die Panzerringe in die
Brust. Maja sah ihn ermatten und niedersinken. Stumm, ohne Klage und
kmpfend bis zuletzt, starb er seinen Rubertod. Er bat nicht um Gnade,
und keine Schmhung kam ber seine Lippen.

Kaum war er gefallen, als die Bienen zum Eingang zurckeilten, um sich
aufs neue in den Kampf zu werfen. Der kleinen Maja hatte das Herz hei
und heftig gepocht, als sie dies gesehen hatte. Leise schlich sie zu dem
Sterbenden. Gekrmmt lag er still im Dmmerlicht, aber er atmete noch.
Maja zhlte wohl zwanzig Stiche, aber die meisten waren vorn und sein
goldener Panzer war unversehrt. Da Maja sah, da er noch lebte, eilte
sie fort und holte Wasser und Honig, um den Sterbenden noch einmal zu
erfreuen, aber er schttelte den Kopf und wehrte mit der Hand ab.

Was ich haben will, nehme ich mir selbst, sagte er stolz, geschenkt
will ich nichts.

O, sagte die kleine Maja, aber ich dachte nur, Sie htten vielleicht
Durst.

Da lchelte der junge Offizier die kleine Maja an und sagte ganz
eigenartig ernst und fast ohne Traurigkeit:

Ich mu sterben.

Die kleine Biene konnte nicht antworten. Ihr war, als begriffe sie zum
erstenmal, was es hie, sterben zu mssen. Ihr schien, als sei ihr der
Tod viel nher, nun wo ein anderer ihn erleiden mute, als damals, wo
sie selbst im Netz der Spinne ihn erwartet hatte.

Wenn ich doch etwas tun knnte, sagte sie und weinte.

Der Sterbende antwortete ihr nicht mehr. Er schlug noch einmal seine
Augen auf und atmete noch einmal tief, und beides tat er zum letztenmal.

Eine halbe Stunde spter wurde er mit seinen erschlagenen Gefhrten aus
dem Stadttor nieder ins Gras geworfen. Aber die kleine Maja verga nicht
mehr, was sie durch diesen kurzen Abschied erfahren hatte. Sie wute nun
fr alle Zeit, da auch ihre Feinde Wesen waren wie sie selbst. Da sie
ihr armes Leben liebten, wie sie selbst, und den schweren Tod sterben
muten ohne Hilfe. Sie mute an den Blumenelf denken, der ihr von seiner
Wiederkehr in jedem neuen Erblhen der Natur erzhlt hatte, und sie
wnschte sich sehr zu wissen, ob auch die anderen Wesen, die den Tod der
Erde starben, zum Licht zurckkehrten.

Ich will glauben, da es so ist, sagte sie leise. Da kam ein Bote und
rief sie vor die Knigin.

Maja fand den Hofstaat versammelt, als sie den Empfangssaal der Knigin
betrat. Ihre Fe zitterten und sie wagte kaum den Blick zu heben,
in Gegenwart ihrer Frstin und so vieler Wrdentrger. Unter den
Offizieren, die den Stab der Knigin bildeten, fehlte so mancher der
tapfersten, und die Stimmung im Saal war sehr ernst und auerordentlich
feierlich. Aber auf den Stirnen aller lag ein Glanz von Erhobenheit, es
war, als ob das Bewutsein ihres Siegs und ihres neuen Ruhms alle wie
ein heimliches Leuchten umgab.

Da erhob sich die Knigin, trat ganz allein inmitten aller auf die
kleine Maja zu und schlo sie in die Arme.

Ach, das hatte sie nicht erwartet, das ganz gewi nicht, und ihre Freude
war so gro, da sie weinte. Es ging eine tiefe Bewegung durch die
Reihen, und wahrscheinlich war niemand darunter, der das Glck der
kleinen Maja nicht teilte und der ihr nicht von Herzen dankbar dafr
war, fr ihre Entschlossenheit und fr den Wagemut ihrer raschen
Warnung.

Und dann mute sie erzhlen. Jeder wnschte zu wissen, wie es gekommen
war, da sie die Plne der Hornissen in Erfahrung gebracht hatte, wie es
ihr gelungen war, dieser schrecklichen Gefangenschaft zu entrinnen, aus
der noch keine Biene entkommen war.

Und sie erzhlte von Anfang bis zu Ende alles Wichtige und Bedeutsame,
was sie erlebt und erfahren hatte. Von Schnuck mit den glitzernden
Flgeln, vom Grashpfer, von der Spinne Thekla, von Puck und von Kurts
liebevoller Hilfe. Als sie vom Elfen erzhlte und von den Menschen, war
es so still im Saal, da man durch die Wnde hren konnte, wie hinten
die Trgerinnen im Stock Wachs kneteten.

Ach nein, sagte die Knigin, wer htte gedacht, wie lieblich die
Elfen sind.

Und sie lchelte vor sich hin, wehmtig und voll Sehnsucht, wie Leute
lcheln, die Verlangen nach der Schnheit haben.

Und alle Wrdentrger lchelten auf dieselbe Art mit.

Wie war doch das Lied des Elfen? fragte die Knigin, sag es uns noch
einmal, man sollte es wirklich behalten.

Und die kleine Biene sagte noch einmal das Lied der Elfen:

  Meine Seele ist der Hauch,
  der aus aller Schnheit bricht,
  wie aus Gottes Angesicht,
  so aus seiner Schpfung auch.

Es war eine kleine Weile still, nur im Hintergrund tnte ein verhaltenes
Schluchzen. Wahrscheinlich dachte dort jemand an einen gefallenen
Freund.

Als Maja dann fortfuhr zu berichten und von den Hornissen sprach, wurden
alle Augen gro und still und dunkel. Jede versetzte sich in die Lage,
in der eine der Ihren sich noch vor ganz kurzer Zeit befunden hatte, und
ein leises Zittern und tiefe Atemzge gingen durch die Reihen.

Entsetzlich, sagte die Knigin, also schrecklich ...

Die Wrdentrger sagten leise etwas hnliches.

Und so bin ich denn endlich wieder angelangt, schlo Maja, und ich
bitte vielmals um Verzeihung.

O, es wird allen verstndlich sein, da niemand der kleinen Maja ihre
Flucht aus dem Stock nachtrug. Die Knigin legte den Arm um ihren Hals
und sagte gtig:

Du hast deine Heimat und dein Volk nicht vergessen, und im Herzen warst
du treu. So wollen auch wir dir Treue halten. Fr die Zukunft sollst du
an meiner Seite bleiben und mich in der Leitung der Staatsgeschfte
untersttzen, ich glaube, da deine Erfahrungen und alles, was du
gelernt hast, auf diese Art am besten allen zustatten kommen werden und
dem Wohl des Staates.

Diese Bestimmung der Knigin wurde von den Anwesenden mit groem Jubel
aufgenommen, und es ist dabei geblieben.

So endet die Geschichte von den Abenteuern der kleinen Biene Maja.
Man hrte, da ihre Wirksamkeit der Bienenstadt zum Wohl und Nutzen
gereichte, da sie zu hohem Ansehen kam und von ihrem Volk geliebt
wurde. Zuweilen suchte sie an ruhigen Abenden fr ein Stndchen der
Unterhaltung das stille Kmmerchen auf, in dem immer noch Kassandra
lebte, Gnadenhonig a und alterte. Dort erzhlte sie den jungen Bienen,
die ihr gerne lauschten, die Geschichten, die wir mit ihr erlebt haben.


+Ende+


       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *
       *       *       *       *       *

Fehler und Unregelmssigkeiten

_Rechtschreibungsformen wie stehen : stehn sind ungendert._

+Die englische Ausgabe+ / bei Ch. E. J. Kidd, Lenares
  _Druckfehler fr Benares?_
... und rief ganz begeistert:
  _Original hat begegeistert_
berall glitzerte und funkelte es ...
  _Original hat fun/elte am Seitenende_
Wir Elfen erscheinen den Menschen nur in ihren Trumen.
  _Anfhrungszeichen fehlt im Original_
</article>
